---
postid: 00f
title: A change of mentality
author: Lucian Mogoșanu
excerpt: Romanian mentality is changing, only not in the way we expect it to.
date: September 18, 2013
tags: asphalt
---

In the last five years or more, I keep hearing of such a thing as the need for
"a change of mentality", in connection with all sorts of post-1989 Romanian
stuff. Since we're here, I'll have to digress a bit.

Romania is a fairly young country. We've been attempting (with more or less
success) to remain cohesive since the 1800s and have been growing in the early
1900s, only remaining stable from the points of view of territory and
population after the Second World War. There have been said, more or less
crackpot-theoretical attempts of "some powers" to destroy this cohesion in 1989
and the first few years after, without any clear success, so Romania looks
pretty much like a unitary state at the moment.

Anyway, after almost fifty years of comunism, a lot of the post-89 events came
like major blows to the head of the masses. For example, we saw that once
markets opened, most local industries proved to be uncompetitive, so they
became extinct[^1]. Similarly, many banks were nothing more than Ponzi schemes
run by crooks who became rich in a really short period of time, and other
businesses were started by ex-secret services guys that well, had the info,
while the stupid masses did not. Long story short, the last twenty-four years
or so of "Romanian democracy" have been some kind of bizarre circus, and now
things don't seem to head in any clear direction.

So, as I was saying, in this context people start suggesting changes, most
notably "a change of mentality". It certainly sounds good to people who've
never been abroad but somehow seem to think that the countries to the West are
more "civilized", and everything is just great there and dogs are running with
pretzels on their tails[^2]. People there seem to have so much better
mentalities, at which point Romanians start believing that trying to mimic them
would be a pretty good idea. As a matter of fact, it's a really bad idea. The
why behind it might not be obvious, so I'll have to explain.

Changing a collective mentality as a whole would be a good idea if it didn't
destroy the subjects, at least from a cultural point of view. It's similar to
what Orwell was describing in 1984: modify concepts, news and everything else
so that people start having a new conception of life. It's the exact opposite
of what nationalists aim to do, replacing the Romanian person with its German
or Swedish or Whateverish equivalent. The thing is, mentalities *do* change in
time, only they do it really slowly, so we rarely take the time to notice how
much the mentality of your average Romanian has changed since 1989.
Supermarkets, television, Internet, all the "un-Romanian" things changed
Romanians' mentalities more than one would expect. Yesterday's Cartoon Network
kids are today's English-speaking (almost-)adults who pay taxes. Eighty-year
old grandmas spend a couple of hours a week on Skype, chatting with their
nephews in Spain, which, I'll tell you, was *unimaginable* twenty-five years
ago. And I could go on and on with the examples, but I'll stop here.

The thing is that absolutely no one wants to completely destroy Romanians'
national identity, not even anarchistoid youngers who deserve a good beating
for being such hipsters. Surely, the state is bad, politicians are bad, but do
we like Romanian food, nature, pussy and other stuff that them westerners only
wish they had[^3].

Besides that, after working for some time with technology, I've learned that
paradigm shifts almost never lead people where they expected. What I mean is,
back in the '70s computers were used mainly for maths and no one could have
conceived then that pockets could fit a machine capable of games, music, movies
and instantaneous communication forty years later. I'll consider this example
relevant, however unrelated it might seem.

In Romania's case, the sudden shift from communism to democracy was exactly
that, a major paradigm shift. As I was saying, we still have problems dealing
with it. So there you have it, our dearly beloved paradigm shift, that's
changing our mentalities whether we like it or not. Is that any good? We seem
to think not, but we're forgetting that in '88-'89 people were sitting all day
long at queues fighting over two kilos of expired meat. Is that any bad? Maybe,
but once again, we're forgetting that Romanian education kept the bar high in
mathematics, engineering, gymnastics and a few others, which is a great
performance for a country of twenty million people.

My opinion and mine only, and you can do with it whatever you wish, fellow
Romanians, is that you can stick your "change of mentality" in places that
hurt. It's ceased to have any relevant meaning, all we need now is to focus and
*maybe* get out of this mess we're in.

[^1]: The same crackpot theorists believe that "some powers" from the West
systematically sabotaged Romanian industry, agriculture and pretty much
everything that was productive in the country. I, for one, believe that we
sabotaged ourselves, mostly due to the fact that we had, and still have, no
idea in the world of how the so-called "Romanian democracy" is supposed to
work.

[^2]: The saying is a rough translation of a Romanian expression, "fug câinii
cu covrigi în coadă". You might have an idea of what that means if you've ever
been to Bucharest: it's one of the cities that are choc-full of dogs; now, if
only they had pretzels on their tails, every lazy ass could get a piece to eat.
Basically, it's a popular representation of socialist utopia.

[^3]: Yes, these are mostly fallacies. It's not like Romania is the only
country in the world where they serve good food.
