---
postid: '011'
title: J.J. Abrams tried to pull a Wrath of Khan and failed
author: Lucian Mogoșanu
excerpt: 'An analysis of Star Trek: Into Darkness.'
date: October 6, 2013
tags: video
---

The Star Trek series have been a milking cow for almost half a century now,
which if we rest on the thought for a moment, is a pretty amazing thing. And
all the credit for that goes to the fans, many of them maybe in their sixties
or more now; none due for producers, writers, or whatever, with the notable
exception of the late Gene Roddenberry.

As you probably already know, earlier this year Paramount launched the motion
picture called *Star Trek: Into Darkness*, directed and produced by the same
guy who directed and produced the prequel *Star Trek*, namely J.J. Abrams, who,
by the way, will also produce Star Wars films soon, further adding to the
confusion of the science-fiction illiterates. The actors from the previous
movie are also back, so the viewer is expected to be familiar with the
characters, setting and whatnot. Basically, Into Darkness is a movie for the
fans, new or old.

I'll be blunt and state that Into Darkness is in my humble opinion mostly a
piece of crap, which was to be expected after seeing the 2009 Star Trek, also
bad, which I saw immediately after Star Trek Enterprise, which well, let's just
not get into any more details. I will, for the record, share with you the
reasons behind my firm belief.

## The Federation-USA analogy

The tale starts with an obvious TOS copycat scenario as an exposition. Then, as
the plot unfolds, Abrams starts pissing on basically everything that Star Trek
was in Roddenberry's vision. Strong, proud, Federation, principled from admiral
to simple citizen? To hell with that. Trying to reason with the enemy? Fuck
that, kill the bastard. Cultural diversity? Humans are zee best, who cares
about the rest[^1].

What especially bothers me is that today's mainstream political bullshit is
brought knee-deep into the story: a significant part of the movie is about
terrorism and the American hypocrisy[^2], something which one might think the
human race would have surpassed until 2200. The only reason, I suppose, for
making this the basis for a story is the topic's rising popularity in the
United States, something the rest of the world doesn't really give a damn
about. In fact, the more "terrorism" becomes a part of American (pop) culture,
the more uninteresting and irrelevant said culture becomes. Well, that's their
problem.

Another purely American trait is the sheer antagonism concerning the enemy,
"John Harrison", turning the whole terrorism thing into a personal vendetta.
Again, Abrams tries to illustrate how Starfleet/USA heads will simply disregard
every rule, regulation and principle to catch a guy they won't like, that
immediately after lecturing poor young Jim Kirk on the importance of such
rules, regulations and principles. At the same time Kirk, who's once again
portrayed as a brilliant guy, pisses once again on regulations by pursuing the
vendetta despite his health (at least that's what Bones says), a fact motivated
by the death of his mentor. I don't know, if I were his superior, I would have
suggested him a week of vacation or something.

Finally, Abrams jumps the shark one more time by hitting a ship into Starfleet
headquarters (I think). Basically, what he means to say is that at least two
hundred years from 9/11[^3], bad people will enjoy crashing stuff into
important American buildings. Looks like simple-minded paranoia to me, and
what's worse is that many US citizens are buying it.

## Plot devices

Abrams attempted, as I was saying, to pull a Wrath of Khan. I'm not saying that
he tried to make a movie as successful as Star Trek II; well, he did try, but
that's not the point. He wanted to make a movie that is also very similar to
the old one, and the first and most obvious sign of that is the movie's main
antagonist, John Harrison, also known as Khan.

Other copied characteristics are more subtle. For example, in many Star Trek
episodes, regardless of the serie, one of the characters breaks or bends some
rule or another, because well, rules are not perfect and sometimes the greater
good is above them. Sure, unlike Into Darkness, classical Star Trek has no
"good guys" and "bad guys", and unlike Into Darkness, the "greater good" is
some obvious moral and ethical virtue, not mindless reciprocation or sheer
stupidity. But Into Darkness writers integrated the small-but-not-so-small
mistakes into their characters anyway, maybe in the hope that they'll bring
some of the humanity of the original Star Trek shows and films into this one.

The rest of the plot devices are more or less stupid, or just not thought out
very well. For example, Kirk, among all the Starfleet's big guys, figures out
that someone's going for Starfleet people, and by some weird coincidence he
does that too late and almost everyone else dies. After killing almost
everyone, bad guy Khan teleports to Qo'noS, but there's no explanation given as
to *how* he pulls out that rabbit out of the hat, since long-range
teleportation wasn't possible in Star Trek settings as far as I can
remember[^4] [^5].

Then Kirk is sent to find the bad guy, who, by the way, saves them, because he
actually wanted to save his genetically-enhanced buddies. All's nice and good,
but all this charade was meant to start a war with the Klingons, and from that
point to the end of the film (and after it), I didn't understand the point
behind all this. Ok, so what was Marcus trying to achieve there? Except killing
Khan, I mean.

So then it becomes apparent that one of the good guys, Marcus, is actually a
bad guy. The problem with this is, the viewer is never given a clear reason
why; all we know is he comes in a big bad ship (USS Vengeance), and then when
the Enterprise enters warp, manages to follow it and *magically* pull it out of
warp. Seems legit.

At some point in the movie, after sending Kirk to certain death, Spock decides
that it would be a good idea to have a discussion with himself (his
alternate-universe self, that is) about this Khan guy, which is, you know,
fairly stupid and definitely illogical, as he could have done that way earlier.
And then he finds out that Khan is indeed the bad guy and that he must kill him
or something, only near the final he finds out from Uhura that he mustn't.

Finally, Kirk dies. Really. The way of dying and the actual death scene are
copied piece by piece from Wrath of Khan, only the roles are reversed, which
was somehow supposed to create a parallel between this movie and that one. Only
I'm not sure it did; I don't feel like it did. Do you?

## Jim grows up, and maybe J.J. will too

At the end, James Kirk is another man. Which means that Into Darkness was not
only a tale of swashbuckling adventures in space, but also Kirk's
Bildungsmovie. And that's pretty sweet, I'm not kidding.

The actors are pretty damn good, with the exception of Yelchin (Chekov) and
Pegg (Scotty), who are mostly there for comic relief. I still can't figure out
why they chose Yelchin, since he speaks an [impecable US English][2]; Pegg's
got a pretty good personality, but he overdoes it. Pine is good, although he's
no Shatner, while Cho and Saldana are from the small number of actors who seem
to make absolutely no effort to immitate the ones from the original series.

I was pleasantly impressed by Quinto's Spock; he seems to get into it better
than in the previous movie. My favourite was however Benedict Cumberbatch, who
does a mean Khan, one that, in my opinion, at times manages to get at the same
level with Montalban's.

## Hollywood and The Problem™

Despite it being mostly a piece of crap, I enjoyed Into Darkness. What I mean
is, I enjoyed the action, the 3D stuff. I also enjoyed the comic relief, some
of the witty replies coming from the more or less stereotypical portrayal of
some characters (Bones, for example).

However, while the funny moments were welcome, I wasn't there for the action,
and while viewers don't really express it, I'm fairly sure many of them weren't
there for that either; and no, I am not speaking *solely* of die hard Star Trek
fans. This, I think, manages to expose the underlying problem of the American
film industry.

If you ask me, this movie isn't worth buying, despite it being Star Trek and
despite the millions of dollars spent to make it happen. If you ask me again, I
think that Hollywood should be grateful of the fact that people are even
pirating the movie and watching it. It's not good, even by Star Trek movie
standards[^6], which makes Abrams' effort almost useless.

[^1]: Seriously, as far as I could tell all the leading positions in Starfleet
are occupied by humans, like the ethically-superior Vulcans never existed.
Which reminds me: only one Vulcan appears in the movie; Spock, obviously. It
might have something to do with the destruction of Vulcan in the previous
movie, I'm not quite sure.

[^2]: At least they got one thing right. America trains guys, guys become
enemies, hit America's ass; Starfleet trains guy, guy becomes enemy, kicks
Starfleet's ass. Yep, there's your pattern.

[^3]: Americans refer so much to 9/11 simply because they haven't had that many
important events in their history. I mean, Romans subdued the entire Europe,
Germans under Hitler killed millions of people, Soviets under Stalin even more,
and suddenly Americans come with this particular piece, which supposedly
"rocked the western world". I'm not sure whether it's in reference to the event
itself or the invasion of middle-eastern countries, or justifying it to impose
absurd laws and spy on people. Only history will tell.

[^4]: Most of them? All of them? I don't remember, but I do remember that this
transportation thing was furiously debated by Star Trek nerds, so the show
producers usually tried to make them seem at least remotely plausible. Well,
not in this case, it seems.

[^5]: [Memory Alpha][1] says that it's a "Portable transwarp beaming device".
This screams "bad plot device" all along, since there would have been much more
advanced stuff that the Federation could have done with it. Rather than letting
it slip in the hands of a criminal, I mean.

[^6]: The reader might probably feel inclined to argue this, but I don't think
any of the Star Trek movies were particularly good, mostly due to them being
Hollywoodized versions of the series. Integration with "action" and harsh plots
never went well for a story so... settled, as Star Trek's is.

[1]: http://en.memory-alpha.org/wiki/Portable_transwarp_beaming_device
[2]: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3LsFdM9Xipg
