---
postid: '013'
title: On the rights of animals
author: Lucian Mogo»ôanu
date: December 1, 2013
tags: cogitatio
---

**Ante scriptum**: <em>In the last twenty years there have been numerous brief
yet heated debates on the stray dogs living in Romanian towns. NGOs argue that
euthanasia, a now traditional practice for the "humane" ending of animal life
in the so-called "civilized" countries, is not to be used on dogs which they
claim to be owned by the community, as they have as much a right to live as
anyone; not to mention other rights. There's nothing peculiar about that, as
Romania is a young democracy and has a lot to learn on a variety of matters.
Such a recent event has led me to write this article on the more general
subject of animal rights, although I believe that the subject is or should have
been exhausted decades ago by thinkers.

That being said, there is a clarification to be made: it is clear that humans
are animals. However, for the purpose of succintness, in this post I will refer
to the set of animals as that of animals excepting humans, since human rights
are a whole different story.</em>

Thus it has been, and thus it is, and thus it shall be: the rules governing
life on Earth are set by evolution. It is not entirely clear what evolution
means, or rather it's perfectly clear that it is, and we can see it happening
even though we can't, only we have little to no idea what its rules, or its
algorithm, or its mathematical equation is. We -- that is we, humans -- however
have a grasp of its nature, and it is this: life flows through nature,
therefore life exists and grows by consuming life, which in itself also implies
death. Thus it has been, and thus it is, and thus it shall be.

From this, a variety of concepts emerge, of which those of competition and
[fitness][1] are more relevant to us. It is clear that, given finite resources,
life competes with other life for the propagation through time, or survival, as
they call it[^1]. It is also clear that in an event or series of events that we
describe as a competition, there are always one winner and one or more losers;
by comparing the winner and the loser(s), we say that the winner is "more fit"
than the loser(s), therefore we can start by establishing something such as a
preorder relation on the set of competitors and go as far as describing fitness
as a mathematical function.

## Beasts, humans and the food chain

Thus life's (natural) history on Earth has been fraught with killings. Animals
killed plants by eating them[^2]; animals killed other animals by eating them;
microbes killed other life forms by infecting them, and so on and so forth.
Unfortunately, and at the same time fortunately, life could not exist without
such consumption. They could not just live together as one big, happy family.

From all this, the so-called food chain was established. It is improperly
called a chain, since this is a circular structure which can be represented in
many dimensions.

At some point in time, somewhere in this food chain arose humans; an atypical
species, since their brains amassed so much complexity that they began focusing
less on adapting themselves to nature and more on adapting nature to their own
liking, and by nature I mean both living and non-living things. We became so
efficient that, for example, we managed to cut entire woods so that we could
build a village, or took a wild plant and genetically engineered it[^3] to make
it edible.

What's more interesting is that we managed to change more "superior" life too.
We exploited the habits of other animals and, by using our own superior
intelligence and resources, made them non-violent, to use them either for
defending ourselves or for food. And this only helped us pursue our quest for
comfort and intelligence further. I doubt that we ever knew exactly where we
were going; fortunately, we arrived somewhere.

Dogs can be found among all these domesticated animals. Some human cultures
used them as food, yet most of them used them for defense against other animals
such as dogs' evolutionary ancestors, the wolves. I will take this example
further in the following section, however without sacrificing the generalness
of my argument.

## Dogs, nowadays

Nowadays, dogs maintain their status of home defense animals within human
communities, just as cats maintain their status of mouse killers, just as pigs,
cows and chickens maintain their status of good food[^4]. In urban
environments, dogs and cats are also used as "company" animals, which is kind
of natural, since dogs have developed a good sense of empathy towards humans.

Simple-minded humans have also developed a monstruous sense of empathy towards
their company animals, most probably due to a lack of purely human emotional
intelligence. Of course, there's nothing wrong with empathizing with other
beings, since that's one of the things that makes humans "superior"; however,
it's unethical, immoral, counterproductive and call-it-what-you-like to
empathize with other beings in the detriment of your own. Surely, we like to
own dogs, but we usually put them down when they get old and sick, whether or
not we like it; it is, after all, the "humane" thing to do.

Thus dogs are, like they have always been, nothing but tools, serving humans
like they always have. To claim otherwise denotes either hypocrisy, or what
Americans like to call a "personality disorder", which automagically
disqualifies the arguing person as an informed debater on the subject.

Thus dogs have no rights. By extension, animals have no rights.

## Post scriptum

It's absurd, no, in fact it's outrageous to claim that "it was the child's own
fault" or "the old lady's fault" for him being killed by stray dogs. I don't
think I'd be able to say such things while on LSD, let alone on a normal day.
In a sane world, the NGOs defending that statement should be expelled from
society.

Stray dogs are an inconvenience to any so-called "civilized" society. Romanian
folks tolerate them more out of laziness and their own self-imposed inability
to do something[^5] rather than out of their love for these animals. Whether
dead or alive, stray dogs shouldn't exist, for everyone's (including their own)
sake. If euthanasia is a more efficient solution, then I, as a Romanian
citizen, am for it.

[^1]: And by "life", I mean "life forms" or "living things". The only purpose
of this shortening is to make it easier for me to express myself, not
necessarily for you to understand. But you will, if you take the time and
patience.

[^2]: That is, fundamentally, why the Buddhist conception of "respecting all
life" doesn't work. They refer in fact to animal life, when plants and fungi
and bacteria and other domains and kingdoms of life deserve as much respect as
any other, right? But they can't get as much respect, because such is the
nature of life and it cannot be changed, lest that change brought by
extinction of all life.

[^3]: Cross-breeding is a kind of genetical engineering, why wouldn't it be?

[^4]: Although the "non-civilized" Chinese do eat food made out of dogs, not to
mention the high-quality gloves they can make out of dog skin. Note that if we
look at it from a purely *democratical* point of view, the Chinese are superior
in numbers to all the countries on the globe. Good thing they're not living in
a democracy, eh?

[^5]: It's a communist thing. It's hard to understand the phenomenon if you
haven't lived through it.

[1]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fitness_function
