---
postid: '01b'
title: Some of the things I've read
excerpt: Previously dubbed "On reading".
author: Lucian Mogo»ôanu
date: March 15, 2014
tags: reading
---

*Inspired partly by [dAImon's laziness][1] (in Romanian).*

Contrary to popular belief, reading is, I believe, more than simple
consumption. In fact I would go as far as to say that reading is complex
consumption, as it involves not merely going through a text, but understanding
its main ideas, its meaning as a whole, and acknowledging that they have
changed us in some way or another. Of course, very frequently there are texts
which do not change us in any way, but then again we might as well say we
haven't really read anything in that case.

Reading is also a prerequisite for writing, in such a way that the writer must
continuously train to keep his mind focused on the stream of words that come
and go, while making sure the proper ideas linger. That is why I will always
feel like I am unable to put my words on the paper if I haven't read in a
while, and that is while (from my experience at least) the lack of reading is
bound to turn people into dumb creatures with an extremely limited grammar and
vocabulary. Not to speak of style, which is more than mortals such as myself
can handle. Surely, language has an impact on the human mind, and reading has a
deep impact on the mental mechanism of language.

Thus I strive to read. I read many blogs' daily writings, but I will leave
these for another time, since I feel that they deserve a separate post. I also
read books, short stories, poems or lyrics and also scribblings which are more
mathematical or scientifical in nature, but nonetheless art. For the sake of
brevity and simplicity, I will focus on the small number of works of fiction
which I have attempted to read in the past ten months or so, some of which I
have finished and some of which I haven't.

**God Emperor of Dune**: This one's the sequel to the so-called "Dune trilogy"
(also written by Frank Herbert), namely Dune, Dune Messiah and Children of
Dune. I've either had too much of the Dune universe or I was tired with Frank
Herbert's rather difficult style, but the fact is that I haven't managed to get
past the third chapter or so. Maybe it's because, in contrast to other stories
which stretched out over more than two volumes, the Dune universe doesn't seem
to be heading anywhere in particular. I had no problem reading Asimov's full
Robots and Foundation series for example, and these went way longer than six
books. Well, maybe I'll re-start sometime later.

**The Hobbit**: It's not a coincidence, I wanted to read it before viewing the
movie. I later realized that reading The Hobbit wasn't enough to do a
canon-check on the movie so I had to consult other Tolkien fans to see whether
the movie is true to the books. The Hobbit is definitely a children's book, and
a lovely one if I may say so; I'm now waiting for the right time to get to LOTR
and Silmarillion, which I heard are even more interesting and full of stuff
which is bound to turn one into a fanatic. Hopefully I'll even assimilate some
self-changing ideas from them.

**David Copperfield**: If there's one thing Charles Dickens is known for,
that's long and extremely boring stories of unhappy children living in the
early industrial England. To be honest, I really enjoyed Dickens' depiction of
those times, but what I enjoyed at least as much was the superb quality of
writing and the beautiful English language, which I rarely manage to find in
nowadays' writings unfortunately.

**2001: A Space Odyssey**: Now, I might find myself in the position of the
stupid guy here. I watched the movie some years ago and I found it extremely
boring. I know it's innovative and stuff, but I can't say that I liked it, and
let me tell you, I watched Russian movies which looked more static and I
enjoyed those. Anyway, I only managed to get past the first chapter with the
book, hell if I know why. Could it be because I read it in Romanian? No idea,
but I don't see myself attempting to read it again anytime soon.

**Crime and Punishment**: This is yet another example of a book I haven't
managed to read and I have no idea why. I'm quite a fan of Dostoyevsky: I read
The Brothers Karamazov and it blew me away. I read The Possessed and The Idiot
and very much enjoyed them and found some of the ideas there inspiring while I
disagreed with others. Well, I couldn't follow Raskolnikov's tale. I must be
growing impatient or something.

**The Trial**: This one I finished, albeit with great difficulty. The plot kept
me hooked, but the lack of continuity ruined it for me. Plus, I didn't manage
to get where the whole thing was heading, so I finished the book more
frustrated than I had begun it. I'll give Kafka one more try sometime, but I'm
somehow afraid that might be the last one.

Finally, there are a couple of authors whom I haven't managed to read yet. I
feel sorry about this, because they're particularly good writers and/or
speakers and I know I have a lot to learn from them.

**Cory Doctorow**: While I'm reading his [blog][2], his Guardian columns and so
on, I haven't managed to read any of his novels and I don't recall perusing any
of his short stories. That's too bad, because he's one of the most no-nonsense
public figures living on the American continent, or in the UK for that matter.
He is also one of the few artists who manage to see how much crap
industrialized music, movies and books have brought to the market, including
the whole slew of anti-sharing lobbies pushed by the industries. In other
words, a ray of hope in an ocean of idiocy.

**Richard Feynman**: I feel ashamed that I haven't read any of his books by
now. Although he's not a fiction writer, he's quite possibly one of the most
inspirational people of our times, and by inspirational I don't mean
"inspirational". Besides, I love mathematics and I still have a thing for
physics, so he's on the top of my list.

There are others, but I feel that this list is more than enough for now.

[1]: http://daimon.me/blog/2014/01/14/in-care-arat-c-am-fost-un-lenes/
[2]: http://craphound.com/
