---
postid: 01f
title: Bitcoin as infrastructure [i]
excerpt: In which I argue that Bitcoin is more fundamental than mere currency.
date: April 27, 2014
author: Lucian Mogoșanu
tags: cogitatio
---

This started out as an illustration of how (rather interesting) applications
could in theory be built on top of Bitcoin or cryptocurrencies in general. At
some point into my train of thought, however, I decided that painting a bigger
picture of the subject is desirable, if not necessary. I personally deem it
necessary, as it will hopefully clarify some points on a concept that is yet
so poorly understood.

Before beginning the incursion, I must warn the reader that the problem of
money, or resources in general, is beyond the scope of this essay. I'm an
engineer, not an economist, nor a finance expert. Nor am I a connoisseur of
Bitcoin, for that matter, but only a lost soul wandering in the dark, finding
questions to answers never posed.

## Part I: Introduction and recurring patterns in human history

In a [previous post][1] I (only) mentioned how we humans don't seem to fully
grasp the underlying mechanisms behind social bonds. The abstract concept of
"network" predates human existence, in fact it predates animal existence and
life itself: physical and chemical bonds are probably the first examples of
graphs on our Universe's timeline, at least as far as our current knowledge
can tell.

Graphs are themselves structures, describable using sets[^1] and pairs.
However, even simple structures such as directed graphs are not enough to
describe physical and chemical phenomena (for example, those involving
energy), although some phenomena may be (possibly) unified under simple,
abstract structures such as categories. But I digress.

These network-like stuctures repeat themselves at the macroscopic level:
biologists like to study the so-called "swarm intelligence" of ant colonies
and bee swarms, observe organizational patterns and how they evolve. This is
no less true for humans: throughout history, we competed and cooperated, we
explored, exterminated or on the contrary, created new relationships and
merged. In many of these events, structure, or infrastructure, has played
a major role.

For a long time, the biggest hurdle in the way of human social or inter-social
bonds was physical, or more precisely geographical in nature. The Vikings were
such a great people mostly due to their proficiency as seafarers. Babylonians
and Greeks were great cartographers, this being a necessity to find the
shortest, or the "right" path from one geographical point to another. Finally,
the Romans were renowned for their roads and bridges, infrastructure proven to
be essential for communications and trade and implicitly for the well-being of
Rome. Indeed, this is probably one of the first examples of engineering-driven
development in human history.

We can easily see how structure, or infrastructure, has influenced major
events in history. One such series of events, depicted on a monument known as
Trajan's Column, were Trajan's wars[^2] on Decebalus' Dacia: to cross the
Danube and invade Dacia, the Emperor hired an engineer known as Apollodorus to
quickly build what became an important piece of engineering and architecture.
Later on Trajan's successor dismantled the bridge to keep the Empire safe from
the barbarian invasion.

Another interesting series of events, which I will only briefly remind, are
the explorations which led to the colonization of the two American continents.
These explorations were mainly driven by the rise of the Ottoman Empire in
Anatolia and Eastern Europe: the Ottoman Türks being muslim and all, they
weren't particularly friendly to Christians. Unfortunately, they also came to
occupy a segment of the trade route between Europe and Asia known as the Silk
Road. Now, some seafaring Spanish and Portugese explorers were now sure that
the Earth must be round, so they went West hoping that they'd reach Asia if
they travelled long enough. Much to their surprise, the Indies they reached
were not the silk-rich Indies they had expected, which is why some of them
decided to slaughter the American natives. But again, I digress.

Now we can fast-forward to the modern Industrial Revolution, when horses were
complemented by engines and roads by railroads. Thus the communication latency
turned from days to hours, and then to minutes after the invention of the
electrical telegraph. Of course, the telegraph itself contributed to railway
development, as most early telegraphs were built alongside railroads for
signaling purposes.

I have one last seemingly unrelated remark, which will lead us into the next
part of this essay: one of the main challenges in telegraphy consisted of
finding a reliable alphabet to encode electrical signals. Many of these
encodings, including the standard Morse code, were binary. This had an impact
not only in engineering, but also in the science of the 20th century.

**Next**: [The fractal nature of computing infrastructure][3]

[^1]: Admittedly, sets are one of the cornerstones of mathematics; this
discussion, like any other, can only remain precise in the framework of
mathematics. Alas, this is not entirely possible, but I can at least try to
hold on to this path as much as possible.

[^2]: One who's missed their history classes might feel inclined to believe
that I am biased and suffering of [dumb nationalism][2] for calling the Dacian
Wars a "major series of events". They were indeed quite an important turning
point in Roman history, for at least two or three reasons. Firstly, both
Burebista (one of Decebalus' predecessors) and Decebalus himself were meddlers
into the internal affairs of the Roman Empire, and they both sided with the
losing party, which made them enemies of the Empire. Secondly, the Getae and
Dacian tribes, reunited under Decebalus, made frequent raids into Roman
provinces, which caused a lot of trouble. Thirdly, Romans found an important
source of gold in the new Roman province called Dacia Traiana. Finally, the
monument itself stands as evidence to the battle's importance.

[1]: /posts/y00/017-the-mechanics-of-socialism.html#fn1
[2]: /posts/y00/00b-romania-s-dumb-nationalism.html
[3]: /posts/y00/022-bitcoin-as-infrastructure-ii.html
