---
postid: 024
title: Broken Age
date: June 21, 2014
author: Lucian Mogo»ôanu
tags: gaming
---

*Meta*: While this is a post standing on its own, it also happens to be, by
some strange twist of fate, the sequel to one of my previous writings, more
specifically the one where I describe the beauty of [Grim Fandango][1]. Unlike
other posts in the [gaming][2] category, however, this one has no motto. We
will see why in the following paragraphs.

<span class="imgleft"><a href="/uploads/2014/06/broken-age-01.png"> <img
class="thumb" src="/uploads/2014/06/broken-age-01-thumb.png" title="A beautiful
decor."/></a></span> So, once upon a time, there was this guy called Tim
Schafer. While working as a producer for LucasArts, he made some of the
greatest adventures ever created, of which I won't remind any right now, but
I'm sure you know them all, otherwise you wouldn't be reading this. Anyway, as
I was [previously hinting][1], Schafer went along with the whole
downfall-of-the-adventure-genre thing and gave birth to some really ugly
gaming experiences, of which we shall once again remind Grim Fandango. My,
those were dark times indeed.

But here we are in our Lord's year 2014, a year of so-called "indie" games:
back two years ago, Schafer started a crowdfunding campaign that gathered well
over three million bucks and resulted in hype, heaps of hope and many promises.
That's when the idea of "Double Fine Adventure" came to be, mostly from the
name of Schafer's new studio, Double Fine Productions, or something like that.

So Double Fine get funded beyond their wildest expectations, then they start
working on this adventure game, and well, at some point find out they're out of
the shitloads of money invested by their backers. About two years later, that
is, in our Lord's year 2014, they manage to release the first act of this game,
which they now name Broken Age. And here we are.

<span class="imgright"><a href="/uploads/2014/06/broken-age-02.png"> <img
class="thumb" src="/uploads/2014/06/broken-age-02-thumb.png"
title="Vella."/></a></span>
Broken Age tells the story of two people, or children, living in what appear to
be two entirely different worlds. One of them, Vella, is part of some kind of
fantasy world populated with monsters and sacrificed maidens, while the other,
Shay, is a lonely, bored kid, living on a spaceship for as long as he's known.
As an aside, the two characters (and not only them) are played by what most
people would consider to be top-notch voice actors, namely Masasa Moyo and
Elijah Wood.

Thus, the player embarks in what appear two entirely different adventures, each
with its own story; and what boring stories the two seemed to be, and how
utterly disappointed I was at about halfway through the game -- luckily, the
game is really, really, really, really short. Remember the old LucasArts
adventures? Remember Grim Fandango? Hell, remember Day of the *fucking*
Tentacle? Well, I'll tell you, Broken Age is none of these. The humour is
bland, the scenes make no sense -- and that's okay for a comedy, except,
y'know, the humour is bland --, the characters are ephemere despite being
played by such good actors, but wait, that's not all.

<span class="imgleft"><a href="/uploads/2014/06/broken-age-03.png"> <img
class="thumb" src="/uploads/2014/06/broken-age-03-thumb.png"
title="Shay."/></a></span>
All things considered, the game's atmosphere is not bad at all. The orchestral
soundtrack is a lovely piece of art, while on the other hand, the graphics are
great: both seem to have been conceived with much attention to detail, and this
shows, like it should in any good movie[^1]. On top of it, the game's interface
blends with the story so well: the inventory is there only when it's supposed
to be, all the important objects and characters are obvious, while the
mechanics are definitely no-nonsense, which really brings out the fun in
point-and-click.

So you know, this really isn't such a bad game, except it's too damn short and
the story/stories are way too forgettable; with the notable exception of the
first act's ending[^2], which is a really good cliffhanger and, honestly, it's
pretty much the best thing in the whole game. Seriously, I loved it and can't
wait to see what happens next[^3].

I shall conclude my short post by answering to the question posed at its
beginning. So, why no motto? Unfortunately I have failed to find any memorable
quotes within the first act of Broken Age. Does this mean that it can't live
up to its predecessors? I don't know, maybe not; or maybe. Time will tell.

[^1]: Only I've always thought that, in terms of narrative, games are much
closer to books than to movies. Maybe that's why Broken Age is so short after
all, while old LucasArts games are so long. This, however, has nothing to do
with the games' actual quality, I've played short adventure games that have
stuck with me forever.

[^2]: At the time of writing, Broken Age has only one act released. Out of two,
I suppose.

[^3]: I bought the "season pass" as they call it now when they sell an entire
game to you. If there's one thing that makes Broken Age less of an adventure
than the old ones, it's this whole dubious marketing tacting. Seriously, Tim,
this looks like nothing more than a cheap scam to us old farts.

[1]: /posts/y00/01a-grim-fandango.html
[2]: /tags/gaming.html
