---
postid: '028'
title: Building business, or why (some) Gypsies are smarter than (most) Romanians
excerpt: A case study on self-regulating systems.
date: August 16, 2014
author: Lucian Mogo»ôanu
tags: asphalt
---

I feel compelled to step into this essay by means of a short digression: I
can't help but notice how many inhabitants of the Internet seek to make a
living off sensationalistic titles such as "How to $X$ your $Y$ business using,
or from, or by $Z$"; because nothing sells better than "The Best Business
ever", like there aren't a zillion definitions for "Best" and like "Building
Business" is a piece of cake. Which, of course, it most definitely is not.

Fortunately this is nothing of the sort. But I feel once again compelled to
digress, discussing my own background into the matter: I have nil knowledge on
the matter of building a business. Which is why the reader, as a young or old,
or experienced or, on the contrary, inexperienced entrepreneur, might wonder
what lessons have I to teach them. Well, maybe I have none, but then again...

I have been fortunate enough to study a tiny bit of game theory for my computer
scientifical diploma thesis. Thus I know that the "Best" business isn't the one
that maximizes profit and/or income, or social utility or whatnot. In my
opinion, the best business[^1] is the one from which all or most of the agents
can benefit, i.e. extract the most utility, in an otherwise perfectly hostile
environment such as product, labor, financial markets, and so on and so forth.
It is what physicists would call a closed system, or what biologists would call
an ecosystem, or what game theorists would call a nash equilibrium, possibly
one attained using mixed strategies.

Facebook, for example, has proven itself to not be an ecosystem upon which
entrepreneurs could build their businesses. Sure, it worked for a while for
more or less dubious companies[^2], but in the long term, the whole "reach",
"engagement", "click-through" etc. marketingspeak has been nothing but harmful
to both companies and clients. This, I theorize, happens because Facebook has
in this game a stake which is in direct conflict with either the users' or the
companies' utility (or maybe both), which in a zero-sum game does not
necessarily lead to what we would call an equilibrium. But as previously
stated, I have no background in economy nor finance[^3], so my theories should
at least be taken with a pinch of salt.

I shall, instead of theorizing, share a case study which, I assure you, is
perfectly real and has left me thinking for a bit, even though the story might
on a first glance seem trivial and uninteresting, but which, I once again
assure you, is anything but that.

You see, the capital of Romania[^4] is split up into six Districts
("Sectoare"). Arguably the least developed of them is the fifth District
("Sectorul 5"), locally governed by a Gypsy mayor, a fact strongly correlated
with and also caused by the great number of Rroma people in District 5. If
you're not Romanian, or European for that matter, you might be blissfully
unaware of the fact that Gypsies are of a way of being that is shockingly
different from that of the Romanian ethnics: being held slaves for hundreds of
years and freed from slavery at the half of the 19th century, they remain a
resilient social group, in that they aren't interested in any way in
"integrating" with the other Romanians, either because they're dumb or because
they in fact have some kind of culture worth defending; hard to say.

By "shockingly different", I mean that their way of being is what some would
call "barbaric": they live in tents, don't in general have a taste for hygiene
and their morals are rather harsh. What's more disagreeable in this (sub)urban
Bucharestian context is that, save for a few, they are poor and poorly
educated, do drugs and are very prone to crime, especially small theft. This is
quite unfortunate among others for the Romanian locals, not too wealthy
themselves, thus not too fond of having a relationship of any kind with their
Gypsy neighbours[^5].

Until one or two years ago, this social problem also led to others, such as
ecological ones. You see, no one likes to live in a neighbourhood that smells
like shit, yet sanitation services were for a large period of time, as many
other public services, available only on paper, not also in practice. The
situation gets more complex, but the general idea is that the streets of
Rahova, Ferentari and other neighbourhoods in District 5 were, with few
exceptions, not quite devoid of garbage. And while in Berlin this would be the
cause of outrage, in Romania no one bothers to cry in public about it, because
that's what fifty years of communism has done to people[^6]. And to think about
it, the authorities even placed public ecological bins for the locals, only the
locals, Gypsies and Romanians alike, have little respect for the establishment,
so they misused those however they could.

Now, as all self-regulating systems go, it seems like there was (and is) a way
to profit from this otherwise bleak situation. First, a few wealthier Gypsies
from the Gypsy mayor's circle of business partners bought some barren, or maybe
toxic pieces of land. Then they opened what one would call "ecological trash
dumps" for any and every type of bottles, including but not limited to the
biodegradable ones.

The first step was, of course, to pay the aforementioned sanitation services a
little extra for garbage sorting. I have no idea if this is really profitable,
but I wouldn't be surprised if it was, since this most probably uses funds
coming from the European Union, District 5 or no District 5. The best part of
it, however, is that, with this crisis and all, people with no jobs started
gathering bottles off the streets themselves and bringing them to these dumps.
So you see, if you walk through Rahova in a summer evening, you'll see a guy
off the streets who's gathering cans of beer left behind by some other
drunkard, "for free", since he's not really doing it on taxpayers' money. He
might not be making much money, but he's learned that something is more than
zero and working your ass off beats sitting your ass off at any time in human
history.

And this is how, dear reader, we arrive at the whole crux of the story.
Building the "Best" business doesn't require "genius", "talent", "innovation"
or other such empty words. Building business, not one, not many, but business
as a general thing, requires looking around you and solving that problem to
help your selfish needs, and only incidentally those of your peers. This
matters, while the government not giving senior folk bigger pensions or
Facebook not working does not.

That is all.

[^1]: And you might have remarked that it is my opinion, which is why I'm
talking about the best, and not the "Best".

[^2]: Zynga.

[^3]: Basically I have no idea what I'm talking about. Or have I?

[^4]: Bucharest.

[^5]: And this is what leads to social tensions, but this is a story for
another time, maybe.

[^6]: Also read [The mechanics of socialism][1].

[1]: /posts/y00/017-the-mechanics-of-socialism.html
