---
postid: 02a
title: Online media is feeding on your tears
excerpt: In which I publicly shame the rubbish that is new media.
date: September 20, 2014
author: Lucian Mogoșanu
tags: asphalt
---

I don't usually bash things or people on the great superhighway of the
Internets, and not because I find it degrading or anything of the sort; on the
contrary, I think of it as a very useful tool, especially in those particularly
nasty times when sorting humans from animals[^1]. No, I avoid doing this
because it doesn't give me any pleasure, while this blog, like the one before
it, was created solely for my pleasure and your struggling to comprehend it.

However, there are times when I must, and here and now is one of those times.
The target is, as you have most probably already guessed, the so-called "online
media" or "social media" or whatever it is they buzzword it nowadays.

The story is, of course, much older than that. "Traditional" forms of media,
mainly radio, TV and paper journalism, were conceived in the previous century
as a means to convey information more efficiently to the masses, hence the
buzzword "mass media". Now, if we look beyond the naïve definition, we will
find that "mass media" had been used for more perverse reasons as early as the
days before World War II, if not earlier; I am not referring to
pornography[^2]. The more "efficient" means of communication were also more
efficient at spreading lies among the masses, going as far as providing the
means for mass brainwashing, or -- is that how they call it? -- collective
psychosis[^3]. Lies, however, are just false information, while mass media
channels can transmit much more than that, i.e. strength, anger, violence, etc.

Given this whole mass media mess, the Internet, particularly the World Wide
Web, had been a breath of fresh air in the 1990s and the early 2000s. Things
were a lot more simpler before Yahoo and Google and Twitter; oh, also,
Facebook, how in the world could I forget that one? All these services aren't
in any way evolutionary steps "in the right way". Yes, they help people become
"more connected"[^4] and they provide better "user experience" and other such
non-qualities; yes, they were made to be accessible, maybe the most accessible
stuff on the Internet, browsable while you sit on the couch holding your tablet
or your phone in your hands, but it also happens that all this stuff doesn't
matter at the end of the day, because they never actually brought any
significant improvements to your life in the first place. In all fairness
though, these so-called "social networks" are useful in a few limited
circumstances; otherwise, they're places where everyone talks and no one
listens to anybody, where users are divided into "content providers" and
"content consumers", because fuck it, they just had to make new "mass media",
also known as "online media", that looks just like the old one and inherits all
of its flaws.

Thus, the "smart guys" are profiting from this one in exactly the same ways
they were profiting from that one. For example it is a well-known practice in
Romanian journalism, where a large part of the political fight[^5] has been
moved online, where most so-called newspapers are controlled by political
factions. In early August this year, one of the "media moguls", also a guy with
lots of political power, Dan Voiculescu, was sentenced to ten years of prison
for corruption, which led to a massive backlash from [Antena 3][plimbare], one
of the stations he owns. Amusingly enough, a lot of the younger people on
Facebook expressed their agreement with the sentence, while the Antena 3
sympathizers, mostly in their 50s or 60s, went as far as to protest in front of
the Cotroceni Palace[^6], which is a clear indicator of the social division in
the country.  "Amusingly enough" is not a very fitting description though, it
would be funny if it weren't so sad.

In the golden age of the World Wide Web, the phenomenon of tear-jerking[^7] is
however global: you may have forgotten the death of Robin Williams, which also
occured in early August this year[^8]. There's not much to be said of the
actor[^9], but his death caused a slew of emotional reactions on all the
"online media" channels. This is in itself understandable, since we often
become attached to characters and in some odd way to the actors fitting in
their roles. The bad news about this is that, well, how should I put it; some
guys actually make money out of your likes.

Is it cynical? Yeah, maybe. Is it in any way ethical? Hell if I know, you're
free to debate this aspect. All I know is that some guys are mining these big
data pools and using them to manipulate the users' emotions in order to, well,
I don't really give a flying fuck why they do it. The good news, everyone! is
that [they're succeeding][social-contagion], and they're quite possibly getting
better at it in time.

So there you have it, people, your Brave New Media, the junk food of the
Internet.

[^1]: Really, no. [You're not born a human, you become a human][mp].

[^2]: Although that was also one of the more important uses, despite the
Christians' cognitive dissonance that it wasn't. Also much to their
desperation, in time it's become at least [as important as
religion itself][post-religion].

[^3]: It happened in the 1920s and '30s with fascism and then after World War
II in more ways than we can imagine. Orwell has done such a good job of
documenting it in 1984, while Huxley has done such a good job of documenting
another side of it in Brave New World. They're both at least as valid in
today's "mass media"/"online media" context.

[^4]: Does anybody remember laughter?

[^5]: Romanian democracy, or rather "democracy", is a peculiar beast. The vast
majority of citizens, from common folk to educated people, love, no, they
simply crave to discuss and fiercely debate politics, while few of them, about
20 to 30% or so, actually participate in the actual political life by doing the
usual stuff that a citizen would do in a functional democracy, such as voting.

[^6]: The president's main residence. It's a well-known fact that Traian
Băsescu, the almost-ex-president of Romania is a very hated figure amongst
Antena fans. Hey, I'm running out of epithets here.

[^7]: Tear-jerking, hate mongering, same crap. It's all "shocking this" and
"mindblowing that". Seriously, cut us some slack now, will ya?

[^8]: It was such a long time ago! I know, right?

[^9]: I'm really lacking in cinematic education, so I find it hard to have a
well thought out opinion about this. To me, Robin Williams is one of those
really good actors having the bad luck of being cast in a series of utterly
pointless films, such as Bicentennial Man. Oh, and the main character, potrayed
by Williams, dies in that movie, and this just goes to show how cold and devoid
of meaning death is, and how we're so very afraid of it. But that's nothing
really new.

[mp]: http://trilema.com/2013/why-i-am-not-a-white-nationalist/#comment-95838
[post-religion]: /posts/y00/018-on-post-religion.html
[plimbare]: http://www.hotnews.ro/stiri-esential-17861732-antena-3-initiaza-protestele-plimbarea-contra-statului-jurul-palatului-cotroceni-ora-17-00.htm
[social-contagion]: http://www.pnas.org/content/111/24/8788.full
