---
postid: '030'
title: Interstellar, or why deus ex machinae in science fiction are a bad idea
date: December 20, 2014
author: Lucian Mogoșanu
tags: video
---

I'd like to start this by stating that this isn't about how Interstellar is a
good or a bad movie; it's a pretty good movie and it also has its bad parts,
obviously, but all that doesn't matter. What matters is stripping it down naked
in front of everyone and whipping it until we get down to its core, assuming
that it is more than form without substance. I know how these kinds of
discourses, dialogues and debates are frowned upon more and more in various
parts of the "civilized world" nowadays, but I don't see how that's gonna stop
us sane people doing it.

I went to see Interstellar more out of curiosity than anything else. Once the
news about Kip Thorne and the [accurate simulation][sciencemag] of a black hole
became public, and later, when people started discussing the movie's more or
less sciencey stuff, I became interested, despite having to go to the cinema
and sit through all the 3D "immersion" crap, because this fad hasn't gone away
yet.

The movie's action takes place in a not-so-far-away future, when the population
growth and other important stuff such as, y'know, "global warming", forces the
move from an industrial society to an agrarian one, where people are mostly
farmers and all the military is gone from the face of the Earth. This isn't
such a bad scenario, but it's a highly optimistic one: I for one would rather
see a couple of big wars happening before this shift, reducing the population
to only a few billion, making the poorly industrialized agrarian approach more
or less realistic, but bleaker than it's represented in the movie; I know that
this is below humanity, but you really don't see the worst in humanity until
you see it. Hunger will make people kill each other and that's that.

This scenario brings forth several other "issues of humanity", namely that the
climate has changed to dust storms, probably inspired by Mars, and wheat crops
are extinct, while corn crops are on the way to extinction.  Probably most of
the animals are dead too, since I don't remember seeing any in the movie. So
our main character, Cooper (played by Matthew McConaughey), is a farmer and an
ex-NASA-pilot-engineer-whatever with a dead wife and two kids, one of whom
becomes a brilliant scientist later in the movie, and is called Murph, played
by three actors. As things go in American movies, out of nowhere our Coop is
re-recruited by ex-NASA, which is now actual NASA, a secret organization
attempting to launch a rocket through a wormhole that suddenly appeared
somewhere in our Solar System, leading us to another galaxy with potentially
habitable planets and, fuckety-fuck, a black hole that does nasty stuff with
time and mind and matter.

There are more or less relevant details regarding the movie's plot, more
specifically the "Plan A" and "Plan B" which are bound to be forgotten by most
people until the movie is over, due to what I suppose is pretty bad writing,
but the more spoilery part is that Coop goes, wastes a few of humanity's
decades, goes into the black hole, breaks relativity a few times, somehow
manages to escape, meets his daughter who's now older than him and then goes
off to find his, I didn't get it, was that chick played by Anne Hathaway his
girlfriend? No she wasn't, but that's not really relevant.

## Science meets bullshit

One of the key aspects that the movie tries to emphasize, and that are part of
Cooper's character, and that make up one of the scenes at the beginning, is the
so-called love of, or for science: Murph tells her father that she has a ghost
in her room, and at that point he tells her that that's not a ghost, and that
the essence of science, and indeed, of truth, is to question everything and
come to truth through critical thinking. The movie doesn't emphasize that
enough in my opinion, but I liked the fact that it actually tried to do that
and it shows that at least some of the writers are tired of the
pseudo-scientific bullshit going on in the previously mentioned "civilized"
world.

This issue is also brought up in another one of the first scenes, when
apparently we are presented with what seems to be a good dose of revisionism
taught in American schools. This is nice and all, but it falls into the
classical Hollywoodian problem of presenting an issue of the US as a global
one; I like to think that the rest of the world, or at least a big part of it,
likes to value truth versus the propagandistic "documentaries" about the Moon
landings being a hoax and other absurd crap, as we've had our share of bad
history with falsifying knowledge, what with the communism and all.

Other than that, the movie aims to give pretty accurate scientific facts, at
least up to some point. There's no sound in space, for one; the facts about the
black hole and relativity are mostly true, although I don't get how people
could survive in an environment so near to a black hole, where the time
dilation factor is 1 hour to 23 years, given that the gravitational pull would
be immense; heck, I don't get how a planet can exist that close to a black
hole, but I guess we'll leave that to speculation. Also, later on some of the
scientists there keep saying some stuff about how "gravity can go back in time"
or something of that likes, which is obviously false, given that the only way
of achieving this would be managing to break the energy-mass equivalence
somehow.

Of course, we'll never know how Cooper survived the pull into the black hole or
how he got back, or how he actually managed to transmit information into the
past, but that's the "fiction" part of science fiction; it's okay, the writers
went full "2001" there and we're all okay with that. Still, I think that if an
advanced humanity living outside of time were able to conceive such a paradox,
I think that this kind of occurence would have been more common in nature,
which makes the feasibility of such a phenomenon extremely improbable. But then
again, so are dinosaurs in the center of the Earth.

The thing that bothered me the most however is why the government would spend
so much money *in secret* to attempt such a risky mission, when I'm sure there
would be better solutions available. Those that have read Dune are probably
familiar with the actual *science* of ecology, versus the nasty, political,
almost religious ecologism occuring nowadays: since we assume that humans have
a hand in "global warming", then it's conceivable that humans could devise
controlled climate modifications, so that the ecosystem would be properly
regulated. This is in my opinion a much more efficient course of action, given
that we already have the means to modify weather. But meh, I suppose sending
people in space is cooler, and it is indeed a good idea, but only after we've
learned how terraforming is done, which doesn't happen in Interstellar.

Oh, and I want a robot like TARS. Really, that's some nice AI, despite that
small chance of them wanting to kill all humans.

## Deus ex machinae in science fiction are a bad idea

Despite the whole black hole thing being a perfectly good element in the world
of science fiction, I think it's a pretty bad plot device, especially given the
science fiction-ness of the movie, moreso that it's its central element: at
some point in the future, humans become a super advanced race being able to
spawn black holes that let people send bits of information to the past, which
constitutes the thing that saves humanity in Interstellar. Don't get me wrong,
it's pretty damn nice, except I don't think it is.

First of all, sending information to the past gives rise to this mind-bending
paradox which is hardly explainable by any science fiction author: humanity is
on the verge of extinction, which leads some people to the desperate act of
going into a hardly achievable quest which eventually leads them to a black
hole where they're able to modify the past in order to lead them there in the
first place, thus creating a time travel loop; well, we don't really know who
created the time travel loop, the dying humans or the super advanced humans who
were beyond time, because we assume that humans survived anyway. So yes, this
breaks any temporal logic that we know, but on the basis of what? "Quantum"?
Come on.

Given this time travel weirdness, I have to say that the black hole is no more
and no less than a deus ex machina. No, it's not that humans saved themselves:
the god from the machine saved humanity, which from a writer's point of view is
nothing more than cheap storytelling, more suited to fantasy settings like The
Longest Journey universe, where the problem is actually solved a lot more
gracefully. Yes, I am aware that these elements appeal very well to the average
viewer, but I'm really, really curious what mister Nolan has to say about it.

Finally, the events in the movie's conclusion confirm the western writers'
obsession with happy endings, whereas in my book Cooper could have just as well
died there without making the story any less richer; meaning that his survival
didn't make the story any more richer, just packed with more irrelevant
details.

## Hollywood and The Problem™ redux

Looking back at the whole thing and at the [thing before it][into-darkness], it
looks like Hollywood has the same fundamental problem as the "music industry",
quite probably as the "book industry", the "game industry" and all other
industrialized forms of art, namely that it has expectations, and more
specifically that it has the wrong ones and the wrong kinds.

Interstellar is a mash-up of good scenery where predictable clichés happen: the
world is in danger and needs to be saved by its saviour, who goes far and
beyond to ensure the survival of ever-lasting humanity, manages to outsmart all
the bad guys and doesn't stop caring for the otherwise worthless characters,
that is, if they don't die. It's nice, it makes a small attempt to keep the
spirit of science alive and another small attempt to criticize the lack of
initiative of sheep and the abuse of stupid people, but they're only small
attempts that the sheep will overlook anyway.

It's not that the movie is bad; also, it's not that it has no substance. Yes,
it does have some deeper stuff, but that stuff is so blandly put together that
it makes you wonder if the Hollywood guys are even capable of writing a good
drama anymore. I'm looking back at the other dull movies and the few
outstanding exceptions, and boy, do I miss movies such as Contact... which
Interstellar does not manage to reach, by far.

[sciencemag]: http://news.sciencemag.org/people-events/2014/11/physicist-who-inspired-interstellar-spills-backstory-and-scene-makes-him
[into-darkness]: /posts/y00/011-star-trek-into-darkness.html
