---
postid: '034'
title: The inevitable transition back into religiousness
date: February 7, 2015
author: Lucian Mogo»ôanu
tags: asphalt
---

The phenomenon we know today as "religion" can be accurately described as a set
of sets of teachings which comprise both ideology and philosophy (and maybe
more?), boiling down to the assumption that some form of God exists. Many [have
challenged][closed-world] this core principle and, more importantly, many have
in the end found it irrelevant to the existence of humankind, as the more
pragmatic ones have found it more useful to use experiment, and in the end
science and its own set of principles, instead of deducting arguments from God.
This is undeniably a starting point for ongoing evolution and also that from
which the rather useless[^1] "science versus religion" debate had sprung.

So science not being in any *real* antithesis with religion, it hasn't and
shall never replace it. People are not becoming less religious and more
scientous, but they have become less religious in the past century, a century
in which they have replaced religiousness-as-worship with [something
else][post-religion]. This isn't in any way "good", nor is it in any way "bad",
especially if we relate these two notions to Christian morals; religiousness
simply happens, or it doesn't, and we, or rather I believe it's important to
observe this.

Religion-as-worship is however inextricably linked to religion-as-superstition.
Now, superstition is a very peculiar phenomenon related to the inductive
(feedback) learning mechanisms that brains are supposedly implementing: if a
given event is repeated enough times in a given context, then we
(unconsciously!) learn to link the event and the context even when no real
relationship exists between the two. Religion can therefore be easily explained
in a given framework: "I want to live (conservation instinct), therefore God",
reasons the primitive mind. Of course, in comparison to the systematic and
arduous approach proposed by science, which can take centuries, as every
complex evolutionary process does, this has the advantage of providing fast
results, but also the major disadvantage of being half-baked at best. I will
let the reader draw further conclusions on this.

And now is finally the right time to delve into the actual context: after
transitioning from religion to [post-religion][post-religion] in only two
generations or so, humanity will go, or rather is presently going through some
rough times. Not because of "pollution", "global warming", "animal cruelty",
"[not enough girls in IT][political-correctness]" and other such possibly false
problems[^2]. No, there are other issues which are more important, of which I
shall remind only one:

Global food scarcity. The idea here is that we're seven billion souls and
growing in a fixed period of time $\delta t$, while the quantity of food is
growing at a smaller pace in the same $\delta t$. Of course, westerners like to
think that we're "the master race" and that our industrialized processes are so
streamlined that this will never fail (note: for the western world), that is,
until this will blow up straight in our faces. No doubt, this is one of the
main underlying causes of war today and nothing will impede some lunatic from
commiting genocide in order to "balance the odds". That can only mean that
rough times, or rather "dark ages" are coming, and in these dark times people
will be more and more susceptible to irrational arguments.

And this is when, as I, the prophet, envision that the world, or at least the
western world, will fall back again into sheer religiousness. This has happened
before and can, and I say that it will happen again, although that might be
some time after I drop dead. It's just the cyclic nature of history.

I find it hard to believe that Christianity will have any success this time,
though. In those dark times, someone will have to come up with a more
"enlightened" religion in order to appeal to the irrational, but more rational
than two thousand years ago mind. And again, this might be some time after my
children drop dead.

Of course, this is an unscientifical claim, since I can't verify it. If you're
from the future and reading this, you will however know whether I was right or
not.

[^1]: One can believe in God and be a good scientist; also, one can refuse to
believe in God and be a lousy human being in general. Setting up an "us versus
them" environment isn't in any way constructive, unless we deliberately intend
to cause a war... which might be constructive from a point of view, namely that
in which by "constructive" we mean "destructive". Which isn't to say that
destruction is not necessary at times.

[^2]: Or maybe the fact that we create such false problems is precisely one of
the things that have led us to this sad state of affairs. No, it's not
"ironical", it's simply dumb, because it's detracted us from the real problems
of humanity, as cognitive dissonance usually does.

[closed-world]: /posts/y00/008-religion-and-the-closed-world-assumption.html
[post-religion]: /posts/y00/018-on-post-religion.html
[political-correctness]: /posts/y01/02e-on-the-inherent-harmfulness-of-political-correctness.html
