---
postid: 037
title: Thoughts on Charlie Hebdo, and the absolute necessity of offending people
excerpt: Je ne suis pas Charlie, mais je pense encore
date: March 8, 2015
author: Lucian Mogo»ôanu
tags: cogitatio
---

Some might say that the 7th of January marks a turning point in the way Europe
looks at terrorist acts, very much like the 11th of September did for the
Americans. Others would claim that Europeans never liked Arabs and Gypsies and
whatnot anyway, and it was only a matter of time until shit hit the fan. While
I don't personally have any thoughts regarding one or the other, it is clear
now that the West's choice regarding its relationship to the Oriental culture
and civilization -- although both "culture" and "civilization" could be
outright denied from being used in conjunction with the Arab world of the 21st
century -- is long overdue. More generally, a well thought out solution to the
West's post-World War II ideological confusions and crises is long overdue.

It should be clear now for any sane-minded person -- are there any sane persons
in the audience this fine evening? -- that the tolerance, "politeness" and
political corectness preached and often practiced by all Westerners alike, from
the United States to Austria[^1], is based upon a shaky foundation consisting
mainly of double-meanings and hypocrisy. Moreover, elected incompetents choose
to apply the ostrich strategy as far as this issue is concerned, while other no
less incompetent politicians take advantage of the people's reactiveness and
lack of rationality to promote batshit crazy agendas.

Well then, you should wonder by now, what's the solution to all this? To which
I will answer that you are obviously an idiot, and that decades of lack of
proper education for yesterday's pampered children, nowadays' fucked up adults,
and moreover, nowadays' "offended" 30+ children, women and gays can't make up
for the centuries of [religiousness to come][religiousness]. There are times
for you, me and all the other self-deprecating "victims" to suck it up, and the
beginning is right there, on the 7th of January. However, there is one,
ultimately palliative, solution to all of this, and if there's one tiny chance
that Western civilization survives, this is its only chance.

This solution comes by no coincidence from Charlie Hebdo itself, and it plainly
states the following: our only chance for survival as a civilized people lies
in the right of offending others -- they used to call it "free speech" three
centuries ago or whenever it was that Voltaire lived, but otherwise [educated
idiots][xkcd] nowadays seem to misunderstand its meaning. No, it doesn't mean
that you *have* to do it, but that if you *can't* do it then the society in
which you live has lost the spirit of free speech[^2].

So how would this so-called "right to offend" be formulated? Despite what
thick-headed figures such as [the Pope][francis] believe, the right to offend
specifically constitutes the right to say anything without suffering physical
consequences upon doing this[^3], this principle standing as a basic difference
between civilized people and savages, or, if you will, between normal people
and retarded pieces of shit that are worth being thrown down society's drain. I
think we can all agree that beating someone and/or killing them because they've
offended your mother is not as evil as it is plain stupid, and if we can't,
then fuck your momma's fat ass.

This basic principle being defined and established, we can now look at the
specifics: insults aimed at persons or groups[^4] should be allowed; trolling
is just fine; offending overgrown children is an absolute necessity, especially
for today's spoiled societies; informing people of the wrongdoings of
politicians, and expressing it using violent language, is a must for the
continued prosperity of people. The examples could go on, I think you got the
gist of it.

Now sensitive, hysterical or otherwise simply guilty people will attempt to
bring forth the argument that this will bring the state of things to turmoil.
Of course it might, especially in places where that would have happened
anyway. In all the other places, civilized people will simply go about their
lives and will make use of verbal violence only as a necessary evil; moreover,
as the civilized, serious and rational people that they are, they will no doubt
employ humour and rational speech, which is at times various orders of
magnitude sharper than simple "hate speech", "trolling" or whatever you're
calling it nowadays.

Indeed the pen, nay, the *word* is mightier than the sword. This alone should
make civilized folks think twice before supressing the use of words, or worse,
redefine language to ends that are unhealthy for civilized society. If you
think shutting up when you oughta speak is "being civilized", then you are
undoubtedly in the wrong, as were many others before you[^5].

That is not to say that there isn't such a thing as too much speech, or too
violent speech. There are however other ways of suppressing that: one of them
involves proper education providing a balance between conservatism and the need
for improvement; another involves simply keeping idiots at bay, which I know is
unpopular due to the general precept of "being tolerant". As we can see,
however, being *too* tolerant is not an option, unless you consider changing
your family's rules to accommodate pillagers and rapists[^6].

Now then, what's it going to be? At the end of the day the West has to make a
decision and stick to it, because the time for acting like an ostrich is long
gone.

[^1]: No, I am not going to include Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and generally
the Balkans in this list. It wouldn't be fair to us, given that we're such
"uncivilized" and all.

[^2]: Now, about the whole thing about "keeping things civil" going on on the
Internet... if you have to tell someone to "keep things civil", then clearly
one of you two is out of their right mind.

[^3]: The right to free speech is ultimately the right to free thought: anyone
may say that they want to rape the Pope's mother, because anyone may think this
and, furthermore, may wish for this. This is entirely different from anyone
having the actual right to do this; Hitler wasn't "evil" because he stated that
he wished to ethnically cleanse Europe, he was "evil" because he used his
political leverage to actually *enforce* it. That being said, Stalin was at
least as dangerous as Hitler, despite the subversive methods employed by the
communists to accomplish the very same deed.

[^4]: Though we can agree that the latter are also stupid, with some rare
exceptions, which is not to say that what Charlie Hebdo did isn't laughable, in
the good sense. Insulting an entire religion is a pretty weird thing to do;
mocking an entire religion is perfectly fine; now, mocking a religion with the
side effect of insulting them, that requires some skill.

[^5]: It took Romanians half a century to realize this and most of us still
regret the mistakes of our ancestors to this day; although I am surprised to
see co-nationals of my age, some of them dear friends of mine, who chuckle when
they hear me say that the West has much to learn from Romanian history. Yes it
does, and there are certain characteristics of the West which I am glad to see
out of [Romanian mentality][mentality].

[^6]: This by itself is a difficult subject: closing down, say, the EU's
borders could have disastrous economical consequences, and it would also mean
the -- to be more or less expected, in my opinion -- splitting of the Internet
as we know it. On the other hand we have the Roman Empire's example of
multiculturalism, which didn't work out all that well at the end. In other
words this is a problem we've been trying to solve in the last decades, give or
take a few millenia.

[religiousness]: /posts/y01/034-the-transition-back-into-religiousness.html
[xkcd]: http://xkcd.com/1357/
[francis]: http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/world/wp/2015/01/15/pope-francis-on-charlie-hebdo-you-cannot-insult-the-faith-of-others/
[mentality]: /posts/y00/00f-a-change-of-mentality.html
