---
postid: 001
title: The Tar Pit: an introduction
author: Lucian Mogoșanu
date: July 25, 2013
tags: asphalt
---

<p style="text-align: right">*[Isn't this where we came in?][1]*</p>

About eight years ago I started writing. I suppose that's an idea bound to
arouse the intellect of your average guy in his late teens, although most of
them have next to no subjects to approach. I myself had no idea what I was
going to write about and I'll confess this has changed very little in these
years. But I felt an urge to write, in very much the same way someone needs to
pee after five beers. And I was motivated by two main ideas that I can
remember.

Firstly, I had started reading seriously since three or four years before. I
hadn't read much else besides Romanian literature, which, mind you, can prove
to be excruciatingly dull at times[^1], but I was interested in structure and
in how to write after reading all these books, the same way I had been
interested in how to make music after listening to rock and so on. I never
claimed I could do it right, all I knew was that I had to try it.

Secondly, I had found blogs as a way of expression on the Internet. I had
started using computers shortly after learning how to read (at about five) and
was spending most of my time mindlessly reproducing Basic code on a Z80
Spectrum clone, so I could draw geometric shapes and the likes. At ten I
already had a good idea of how to use a PC and at twelve I was browsing the
Internet on dial-up on Friday evenings. Two years after getting my permanent
Internet connection, blogs were looking mighty cool and Wordpress intrigued me
so much I decided to give it a shot. I made a hosting account on some
Geocities-like platform[^2], installed Wordpress and wrote my first post,
entitled "Another Brick In The Wall...". It was an article about mostly
nothing, but I didn't care; I thought I had become a blogger.

However, that didn't stop me from writing other articles about something, some
of it even interesting stuff. To be honest, I didn't care if it was interesting
to anyone else, since all I felt was sharing my experiences with "the
Internet", regardless of whether that "Internet" included anyone except myself.
But I interacted with people, and I kept writing about stuff. And it felt good
for a while.

So why did I decide to start another blog? you might wonder. Well, I always
felt pretty good about having a clean slate. Sometimes such changes are bad,
other times they're beneficial and, finally, there are those times when change
is necessary, and I happened to find myself in the latter situation. Sure, the
new blog™ isn't going to be fundamentally different from the old blog™, but I
felt there was no other way to go.

There are also some technical reasons behind this decision, but I'll cover them
in another post.

*And what's with this "Tar Pit", anyway?*

[^1]: The only novel taught in Romanian schools in the first eighth grades is,
as far as I know, "Baltagul" ("The Hatchet"), written by one of the first
Romanian communist writers, Mihail Sadoveanu. The novel attempts to make a
parallel with the myth of Isis and Osiris, at the same time introducing
traditional Romanian themes and motifs. I suppose the only reason they keep it
in the curriculum is a dumb sense of nationalism.

	On the other hand, I spent the summer before my eighth grade reading Marin
	Preda's "Cel Mai Iubit Dintre Pământeni" ("The Earth's Most Beloved"),
	which, if nothing else, is a good read on the wrongdoings of the Romanian
	Communist regime. Also, the book's rather dubious philosophical content
	made a deep impression on me at the time.

[^2]: Now as dead as Geocities itself.

[1]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MlR3wUPwJCg
