---
postid: 058
title: Catch-22
date: February 24, 2017
author: Lucian Mogoșanu
tags: video
---

<p style="text-align: right">**Motto**:  
*Yes, indeed, you can see him, when he isn't there.  
That is, he'll see you, all right, but only in his office, and only when
he's not there.  
The other times, when he's in... he's not there to be seen.  
Except when he's out.*
</p>

The film[^1] is an excellent piece, seemingly on war, but really
gravitating around three major themes and the interplay between them,
namely: death, travesty and power.

The story begins with Captain John Yossarian's glance
[in the mirror, at his own death][the-mirror][^2], which is a full
circle starting with the death of him who may have been his only
friend. The events set in motion by the story illustrate the same
Yossarian's struggle -- which may very well be your struggle or mine --
to escape this circle, this tar pit of its own. And what better setting
for representing death other than war; empires rise and fall, but war,
murderously laughing in the face of everything, never changes[^3].

Along with death, our main character is accompanied in his journey by
travesty, a travesty exposed by the writers of this particular piece
under the name of Catch-22; no different, however, from doublethink,
post-truth, or whatever flavour's in fashion this season. The travesty
in cause is run by a bunch of bureaucrats who like to call themselves
General, Colonel, Major and whatnot, but who are in fact naught but
derps derping around in a puddle of crass incompetence. It doesn't
matter one bit that the USAF has invested power in them, as power
without substance corrupts not in evil ways, as Tolkien's fantasy would
have one believe, but in mind-bogglingly stupid ways[^4].

And speaking of power. The wielder of power in this movie is not the
USAF nor the military daddy, but the Lieutenant Jew Milo Minderbender,
who for his own profit, and as his name suggests, feeds the entire
travesty. But make no mistake, the man is the only one who doesn't
actually fall in the puddle, but who keeps everyone else there in order
to make a buck.  And if you pay attention, he's honest about it, he
gives "the facts"; though "the facts" are not an object used to build a
narrative, but the very product of the narrative itself[^5]. Surely, you
may think he's evil, and maybe he is, but you don't see anyone else
trying to make [the best][building-business] of it.

Catch-22 has aged well. There are beefy portions of comedy scattered
throughout the movie, in every scene, in every event which otherwise
gives one the chills -- a so-called dark comedy which is quite obviously
the literary device through which the narrator permeates, that is,
conveys all the bits of madness beyond the screen and to the viewer. I
for one was pleasantly impressed by this technique, despite the fact
that it dates back to a couple of millenia before ol' Caragiale.

There's not much left to add. We conclude with:

> **Old man**: You all crazy!  
> **Boy**: Why are we crazy?  
> **Old man**: Because you don't know how to stay alive. And that's the
> secret of life.  
> **Boy**: But we have a war to win.  
> **Old Man**: But America will lose the war; Italy will win it.  
> **Boy**: America's the strongest nation on earth. The American
> fighting man is the best trained, the best equipped, the best fed...  
> **Old man**: Exactly. Italy, on the other hand, is one of the weakest
> nations on earth and the ltalian fighting man is hardly equipped at
> all. That's why my country is doing so well while yours is doing so
> poorly.  
> **Boy**: That's silly! First ltaly was occupied by Germans and now by
> us. You call that doing well?  
> **Old man**: Of course I do. The Germans are being driven out, and we
> are still here. In a few years, you'll be gone, and we'll still be
> here. You see, Italy is a very poor, weak country, yet that is what
> makes us so strong. Strong enough to survive this war and still be in
> existence... long after your country has been destroyed.  
> **Boy**: What are you talking about? America's not going to be
> destroyed.  
> **Old man**: Never?  
> **Boy**: Well...  
> **Old man**: Rome was destroyed. Greece was destroyed. Persia was
> destroyed. Spain was destroyed. All great countries are destroyed. Why
> not yours? How much longer do you think your country will last?
> Forever?  
> **Boy**: Forever is a long time, I guess.  
> **Old man**: Very long.  
> **Whore**: Ciao!  
> **Boy**: Please, we're talking.  
> **Whore**: We go to bed now?  
> **Boy**: No. Would you go put some clothes on? You're practically
> naked. (To old man:) I wish she wouldn't walk around like that.  
> **Old man**: It is her business to walk around like that.  
> **Boy**: But it's not nice.  
> **Old man**: Of course it's nice!... She's nice to look at.  
> **Boy**: This life is not nice. I don't want her to do this.  
> **Girl**: When we go to America, Nately?  
> **Another girl**: When we go to America, Nately?  
> **Old man**: You will take her to America? Away from a healthy, active
> life?  Away from good business opportunities? Away from her friends?  
> **Boy**: Don't you have any principles?  
> **Old man**: Of course not.  
> **Boy**: No morality?  
> **Old man**: I'm a very moral man. And ltaly is a very moral
> country. That's why we will certainly come out on top again if we
> succeed in being defeated.  
> **Boy**: You talk like a madman.  
> **Old man**: But I live like a sane one.  
> **Old man**: I was a Fascist when Mussolini was on top. Now that he
> has been deposed, I am anti-Fascist. (Sips wine.) When the Germans
> were here, I was fanatically pro-German. Now I'm fanatically
> pro-America! (Gestures.)  You'll find no more loyal partisan in all of
> ltaly than myself.  
> **Boy**: You're a shameful opportunist! What you don't understand is
> that it's better to die on your feet than to live on your knees.  
> **Old man**: You have it backwards. It's better to live on your feet
> than to die on your knees. I know.  
> **Boy**: How do you know?  
> **Old man**: Because I am 107 years old. How old are you?  
> **Boy**: I'll be 20 in January.  
> **Old man**: If you live.  

[^1]: 1970, directed by Mike Nichols, after the book bearing the same
    name written by Joseph Heller. Starring Alan Arkin, Art Garfunkel,
    Martin Sheen, Jon Voight, Orson Welles and a bunch of other guys.

[^2]: Giving in to the enemy's logic is equivalent to death. Yes, the
    body may carry on, it may last a decade, two or five, but
    then... what? Ponder on that for a moment.

[^3]: In a manner similar maybe to that other well-known piece about war
    and its paradoxes, this time with Martin Sheen in a major role. I am
    talking of course about Apocalypse Now.

[^4]: Did you ever wonder why your politicians fail you? and not in any
    exceptional way, but consistently and without any apparent end.

    Think about it for a moment: you live in times in which democracy is
    considered valuable. Thus politicians' greatest incentive is to
    claim that they do things "for the people" -- not to actually do
    that, mind you, but only to *claim* it. Some of the more stupid ones
    will actually give it a shot, despite the numerous examples of
    failure given to us by history. And despite the failure, they will
    continue claiming the opposite, leading to a spiral of
    [marketing][marketing] and PR and whatnot, leading us to MAGA and
    whatnot. Popescu's got details in [his writings][politicians].

    But this is an aspect masterfully illustrated by the movie -- and
    this in the beginning of the '70s, when America was still great! --
    so read on.

[^5]: Which is, if you think about it, one of the great marks of
    power. Science is by its very definition falsifiable, and science
    put aside, politics becomes the art of making people believe (in)
    the leader, and not just by mere persuasion. Conversely, perverting
    science in order to support a narrative is inherently evil; but I
    digress.

[the-mirror]: /posts/y00/01e-the-mirror.html
[marketing]: /posts/y02/043-on-the-failure-of-marketing.html
[politicians]: http://trilema.com/2017/why-politicians-dont-ever-do-anything-for-the-people-a-model/
[building-business]: /posts/y01/028-building-business-or-why-gypsies-are-smarter-than-romanians.html
