---
postid: 05a
title: The July Theses, translated and annotated
date: March 5, 2017
author: Lucian Mogoșanu
tags: asphalt
---

*Below the reader will find the translation of a text initially titled
"Proposals of measures for the improvement of political-ideological
activity, of Marxist-Leninist education of party members, of all working
people", written by the General Secretary of the Romanian Communist
Party (also known as PCR), Nicolae Ceaușescu, and presented on the 6th
of July, 1971 before the Party's Executive Committee, after his return
from a visit to some of the East Asian communist countries, the most
notable of which being North Korea. As a sign of political change in a
minor communist country, the Theses do bear some historical value; they
may also be used by the reader as a template for correctly identifying
similar rhetoric and patterns of expression in recent texts or
speeches.*

As a result of the profound transformations which have come to pass in
the years after the liberation[^1], of the victory of the socialist
system, of the vast political-educational activity[^2] realized by the
party, in our country important results have been obtained[^3] in
widening the cultural horizon, in lifting the political and ideological
standard, in shaping the socialist conscience of those who work. This is
expressed by the fact that our entire people, all the working people,
without distinction of nationality, steadfastly forge the party's
internal and external politics, that they deem to be their own politics,
viewing it as the guarantee of their wellbeing and happiness. The
supreme goal of the politics of our party was and is the growth of the
material and spiritual wellbeing of masses, ensuring the conditions for
the plenary affirmation of personality, building the new man, profoundly
devoted to socialism and communism. The political-educational activity
constitutes an inseparable component of the work to build the new social
system, an outstanding pursuit of our party and state[^4].

With all the great successes[^5] obtained until now, in
political-ideological and cultural-educational work there still continue
to persist a series of lacks, deficiencies and shortcomings, whose
elimination constitutes an imperious necessity for the progress[^6] of
our society.

Taking into account the requirements of the current stage of the
socialist construction, the great objectives that stand before the party
and the people in forging the multilaterally-developed[^7] socialist
society, it is necessary for measures to be taken to raise the level of
revolutionary combativity and of the militant, partinic[^8] spirit of
the entire activity political, ideological and of communist education of
masses[^9], operated by the party organs and organizations, by mass and
collective organizations, by state organisms, by propaganda, ideological
and cultural-artistic institutions.

1\. -- Decisive in the achievement of these objectives is the continuous
heightening of the party's directive role in all the fields of
political-educational activity, the increase of responsibility and
exigency of party organs and organizations in guiding the entire work of
mass education, performed through all the means of political influence
and through the factors of culturalization that our society has at its
disposal.

For this purpose party leadership and control will be strengthened to
orient the political-educational activity towards the wide mass
promotion of our party's ideology, its Marxist-Leninist politics, to
heighten combativity against the influences of burgeois ideology, of
retrograde mentalities[^10], foreign to the principles of communist
ethics and party spirit. Special emphasis will be put on presenting the
great achievements obtained by the Romanian people -- maker of
socialism, emphasizing the chief role of the working class, which
fulfils with fairness its historical mission in erecting socialism, the
cultivation of respect towards work, towards the producers of material
goods in our society.

An essential task of the political-educational work performed by our
party is the education of all those who work in the spirit of socialist
patriotism, of love and boundless devotion towards the motherland, of
the decision to not spare anything for the defense of our revolutionary
achievements, of the country's independence and sovereignty, for the
continuous strengthening and flourishing of socialist Romania. In the
process of building the multilaterally-developed socialist society it is
necessary to continue acting for the even more powerful
consolidation[^11] of unity and brotherhood between Romanian, Magyar,
German, Serbian and other working people, who, animated by the same
interests and aspirations, achieve together all the country's material
and spiritual values, take part with spiritedness in the struggle for
the flourishing of the common homeland -- the Socialist Republic of
Romania. It is the duty of party organizations to firmly fight against
any tendency and form of expression of nationalism. Political work must
act unflinchingly against any manifestation of indiscipline, of
violation of the norms of social cohabitation, in the direction of the
development of respect towards collective belongings, towards the
country's laws, to strengthen socialist lawfulness and public order.

The direction and organization of the entire political-educational
activity fall directly to counties'[^12] party bureaux and committees,
to party organs at all levels, to activists who work in the field of
propaganda, to all the communists.

In realizing all these tasks, an important role must be fulfilled by --
under the party's direction -- the syndicates, youth and women's
organizations, all the mass and collective organizations in our
homeland.

2\. -- The Propaganda Section of the Central Committee[^13] will[^14]
present proposals for the improvement of the organisation of party
education, of the forms of political and ideological preparation of
party specialists[^15] and members, in order to develop the[ir]
partinic, revolutionary spirit, to rise the level of party
work. Measures will be taken for the improvement of education plans and
curricula at the Ștefan Gheorghiu[^16] party Academy and the
inter-county party Schools, in order to ensure the preparation of cadres
with the fundamental problems of party work, of the science of political
leadership. Will be ensured[^17] the inclusion[^18] in perfectioning
courses of a larger number of activists from different fields of
activity. The recruitement of lower and higher students[^19] for party
schools will be made among party, state and mass organization activists,
especially those that come from the working class and have a long
experience in production.

3\. -- Will be extended and activated the forms of mass political work:
the activity of agitators, of satirical gazettes[^20], of artistic[^21]
agitation brigades, of different forms of visual agitation at
workplaces, for the popularization and generalization of positive
experience, of achievements and advanced attitudes, as well as for the
active fight against the states of negative things[^22]. Party
organisations will be oriented to strengthen the direct
political-educational work, from person to person, with every party
member, with every citizen.

A special attention must the party organs give to the education of party
and state members in the spirit of the profoundly humanist politics of
our party, a politics pervaded with human care, in the spirit of serving
with abnegation the general interests of society, of the people[^23] --
a fundamental duty and principal criterion for the appreciation of
cadres, of every communist.

Party organs must develop in[^24] our cadres the preoccupation with
ensuring the conditions for the ever wider participation of masses in
elaborating and achieving party and state politics, in the entire
economic, social, ideological and cultural life -- an eloquent
expression of the profound democratism of our socialist arrangement.

4\. -- Will have to rise the role of party gatherings in debating the
main life problems of working collectives, in increasing combativeness
and political vigilance of party members, in lifting the critical and
auto-critical spirit, in promoting the firm position against negative
phenomena, against unsuitable attitudes towards work and the collective
had, of disinterest towards the requirements of working people, against
manifestations of indolence and superficiality. It is the duty of party
organizations to form the mass opinion in the fight against abuses and
dishonesty, dilapidations and all antisocial manifestations.

One of the main objectives of political work, especially among the
young, is the firm fight against tendencies of parasitism, of easy,
workless life, the cultivation of responsibility and of the duty to work
for the homeland, the people, for the socialist society. The fulfillment
of a useful work for society is an honor and an obligation for all
citizens[^25].

5\. -- Is necessary the creation of a large mass current for the
participation of all citizens and especially the young in actions of
patriotic work -- on construction sites, in the industry, in
agriculture, in the management of localities. The party organs and
organizations, mass and public organizations, the local organs of state
power are directly responsible of organizing those actions[^26].

6\. -- Will need to be intensified the activity of education and
political preparation in schools and faculties[^27]. For this purpose,
the Ministry of Education will take measures for the improvement of
educational plans and curricula, giving special attention to the
improvement in the teaching of social sciences. Will need to be lifted
the spirit of responsibility and the role of teachers in the
political-ideological shaping of lower and higher students. Will be
taken measures for the strengthening of the educational directions in
the Ministry of Education[^28], ensuring their integration with party
activists, their direct guidance from the Propaganda Section of the
C.C. of P.C.R. The C.C. Secretariat of P.C.R., the county and town
bureaux of party commitees answer for the guidance of the entire
political activity within schools and faculties, of the content
pertaining to the teaching of social sciences. The educational plans and
the curricula of social sciences will be approved by the Secretariat of
C.C. of P.C.R. A third of the curricula of summer courses for teacher
preparation will be dedicated to political information[^29] and to
debates on ideological and educational problems.

7\. -- Will be taken measures for the intensification of the activity of
political education performed by the U.T.C. organizations[^30] and
students' associations. The principal role in the entire activity of
U.T.C. must be had by the working youth. Must be actioned to promote
among the entire youth the conception about the world and life of the
working class, for the cultivation of the working class' and the
communist party's revolutionary traditions[^31], for the education
socialist, patriotic, through work of the young generation. The research
center for youth's problems is to orient its activity towards these
requirements of youth education.

A special attention will need to be given to cultural-educational and
entertainment[^32] activities among the youth and especially among lower
and higher students, combating the manifestations of cosmopolitanism,
different artistic fashions borrowed from the capitalist world. Will be
forbidden the serving of alcoholic beverages in all the entertainment
premises for the youth.

Will be enlarged and intensified the atheist propaganda[^33], the
organization of mass actions for the disproof of mysticism, of
retrograde concepts, for the education of the entire youth in the spirit
of our materialist-dialectic philosophy.

8\. -- Will be grown the role of the Academy of social and political
sciences in debating the current ideological problems of our
social-political life, of the cultural activity and artistic creation,
in elevating the ideological combativity against foreign influences, in
the powerful affirmation of the materialist-dialectic philosophy and of
our party's politics.

9\. -- It is necessary to grow the role of the press in the widespread
propagation of the ideological positions of our party, of our ethical
social cohabitation principles, in the firm fight against the influences
of burgeois ideology and of retrograde mentalities of any kind. The
press will have to cultivate more the advanced figure of the worker, of
the producer of material goods devoted body and soul to the cause of
socialism, the flourishing of the homeland. Will be ensured the firm
political orientation, especially of the cultural-artistic publications,
in the direction of promoting militant socialist art and literature and
of combating the tendencies to tear apart creation from our social
realities, from the general public of the working people[^34].

Through forms and varied styles of expression, the art must serve the
people, the homeland, the socialist society.

10\. -- Will have to be increased the educational role of all the radio
and television shows. Shows will be addressed in greater measure to the
large masses of audience[^35], especially to workers and peasants,
ensuring therewith of their more frequent presence in
broadcasts[^36]. Will be made a more rigorous selection of artistic
productions broadcasted by the radiotelevision, promoting mostly movies,
plays, musical shows from the national repertoire and especially from
the new, socialist repertoire. Will be ensured a rational balance in the
repertoire politics, so that there will be judiciously represented
valuable creations from socialist countries, as well as representative
works from the heritage of universal culture which possess a profound
social character and a progressive, advanced philosophical
position. Will be eliminated from broadcasts the productions which
cultivate ideas and principles foreign to our philosophy and morals, the
spirit of violence, the burgeois life style, harmful mentalities for the
youth's education.

Satire and humour shows will need to be directed against the negative
phenomena in the society[^37], from the positions of our party's
politics, removing the productions that are in bad taste and harmful or
confusing from an ideological point of view.

The radio and television will stimulate the creation of revolutionary,
patriotic and worker's songs, as well as their distribution to the
masses, organizing for this purpose creation and interpretation
contests, special shows, etc.

11\. -- Will be taken measures for a better orientation of editorial
activity, so that book production responds in greater measure to the
requirements of communist education. Will be exercised a more rigorous
control, to avoid the publishing of literary works that do not answer to
the requirements of the political-educational activity of our party, of
books that promote ideas and conceptions harmful to the interests of the
socialist construction.

12\. -- In the orientation of the repertoires of public performance
institutions[^38], will be emphasized the promotion of original creation
with militant, revolutionary character. Will be given also extension to
valuable works from the current artistic creation of socialist
countries; will be ensured a more rigorous selection of the works from
the classical and contemporary international repertoire.

Will be acted[^39] more perseveringly for the development of Romanian
creations of opera, operetta and balet with themes springing from the
battle of our people for socialism. County and municipal party
committees answer for the just orientation of the repertoires of
professional artistic institutions of performance, as well as those of
cultural houses and community homes.

13\. -- Will be taken measures for the better balancing of the movies
programmed in our cinemas, limiting the projection of police and
adventure movies, forbidding movies which cultivate violence and
vulgarity[^40], which propagate the burgeois life style.

14\. -- An especially important role in the political-ideological
orientation of cultural-educational activity, in ensuring a content
pervaded by the spirit of the politics of our party of the entire
literary-artistic creation is played by party organisations, by all the
communists who perform their activity in this area.

Party members who are part of party and state leadership organs, as well
as all those who activate in ideological institutions, of political
education, of teaching, culture and art, in the entire sphere of our
cultural life, must manifest a grand spirit of partinic exigence, of
combativeness and Marxist-Leninist principledness. They must be an
example in this respect, through their day to day activity as well as
their own literary-artistic creations.

15\. -- The Ministry of Interior Commerce, the Ministry of Tourism, as
well as local party and state organs will watch that in places of public
alimentation will be broadcast especially the musical creation of our
country, making therewith a careful selection of foreign repertoir, in
order to remove the music that expresses decadent currents.

16\. -- It is necessary for measures to be taken to improve the activity
of the Propaganda Section of the Central Committee of P.C.R., with an
eye to the firm realization, at a higher level, of the duties that it
bears. The Board of ideology and the Board of culture and press of the
Central Committee will have to perform a more intense activity, to
debate exactingly the problems of ideological, political and cultural
activity, seeing to the just orientation of the entire activity
performed in the respective fields.

17\. -- In order to debate the problems of political-educational work, a
conference will be convened at the party's Central Committee with the
secretaries of county party committees who answer for propaganda
problems, with cadres responsible in the field of ideological activity,
with leaders of creation unions and of some cultural institutions.

In the autumn of this year, a plenum of the C.C. of P.C.R. will analyze
the problems pertaining to ideological, political-educational and
cultural-artistic activity. In order to prepare the plenum, there will
be organized debates throughout the party organs and organizations, in
the institutions and organizations with educational character, as well
as in the press.

<p style="text-align:center; font-weight:bold;">⁂</p>

Acting in the direction of the proposed measures, it is necessary that
the party organs and organizations ensure the orientation of the entire
political-ideological and cultural-educational activity in the spirit of
Marxist-Leninist traditions, of proletarian internationalism, of
solidarity of the working people of our country with all the peoples who
forge the new socialist arrangement, with the international communist
and working movement, with the working class, with the peoples who fight
for national emancipation, for the defense of their independence and
national sovereignty[^41], with all the contemporary forces that rise
against imperialism, for social progress and peace.

Our party considers that fulfilling the tasks both national as well as
international, constitutes an inseparable dialectical unit, their
harmonious blending being a fundamental duty of every communist.

The entire ideological, political-educational, cultural-artistic
activity that takes place in our country must have as a basis the
general Marxist-Leninist line of the Romanian Communist Party, the
programme elaborated by the 10th party Congress, must ensure their
assimilation and bringing into life by our entire people. The
improvement of political-educational activity must lead to the
intensification of communists' participation, of all the working people,
of the entire party and nation at forging the multilaterally-developed
socialist society, a work that requires both improving the grade of
material civilization of Romania[^42], as well as forming a new man,
with a heightened socialist conscience.

I bring for approval by the Executive Committee these proposals of
measures, seeing to their publication and the organization of their
bringing to life.

<p style="text-align:center; font-weight:bold;">⁂</p>

*The proposals of measures have been unanimously approved by the
Executive Committee of the C.C. of P.C.R. during the meeting on July 6,
1971.*[^43]

[^1]: This particular doublespeak supposedly refers to the communists'
    takeover of state affairs. As things often happen, this event also
    occured in a specific historical context. Immediately post-World War
    II, Romanian monarchy was greatly weakened, more so that Romania was
    officially declared a loser in the war and its remaining competent
    leaders got executed in Romanians' own Nuremberg Trials. This came
    as a great opportunity for the times' pro-Soviet politicians,
    e.g. Ana Pauker and Lucrețiu Pătrășcanu (Romanian communists' very
    own Trotsky, if we were to be snarky), who did not hesitate for a
    moment to grab power.

    And so they did, and they evicted King Michael (the First and the
    Only) from his bloody throne, and the rest is bloody history.

[^2]: The "activity" described here and throughout the entire text being
    completely non-descript in the sense that it doesn't really matter
    what they did, they just did stuff, m'kay? So no one may lift a
    finger to point out that they didn't do anything.

[^3]: This sounds like crap because it is an impersonal expressed
    syntactically as a reflexive, which, in contrast to the previous
    footnote, gives the impression that no one did anything, but results
    were obtained -- by themselves. In Romanian we call this "limbă de
    lemn", i.e. "wooden tongue", because of its deliberately misleading
    vagueness.

[^4]: As the reader may have noticed, most of this paragraph is devoid
    of actual meaning. Some of the remarkable key words are "party",
    "social[ist/ism]", "wellbeing", "political", "educational",
    "ideological", and they don't actually *say* anything other than
    "we're awesome and we aim to be awesome in the foreseeable future".

    Quite a nasty gamble, and an ironical one, given how the Romanian
    socialist communist future looked in hindsight.

[^5]: GREAT SUCCESS!

[^6]: Progress literally means "to move forward", which is also what
    "mers înainte" means.

[^7]: The idiom "multilaterally-developed" is a well-known target of
    derision for educated Romanians who lived through the communist
    regime. The term's usage in public discourse correlated negatively
    with the amount of food available on shelves, which makes the news
    coming in 2016 from countries such as Venezuela a painful reminder
    of times (for) now gone for Romanians.

    Romanians also use this mockery as a reminder to people who naïvely
    believe that "things were better in the times of old". Hell no, they
    weren't, and we'd better not forget that, lest history repeats
    itself.

[^8]: This word does, to my knowledge, not exist in English, or if it
    does, it means something else than represented here. Here "partinic"
    denotes acting to serve the best interest of the party, in its
    spirit and so on and so forth.

[^9]: Note that "political", "ideological" and "of communist education
    of masses" are all attributes of "activity". I am aware that in
    English attributes generally* appear before the subject, but this
    particular sentence is so contrived that it was difficult to put it
    any other way while carefully preserving the initial text's
    style. Thus I ask the reader to forgive me this flaw.

    \-\-\-  
    \* One notable exception being Gilbert and Sullivan's Modern
       Major-General's Song.

[^10]: Note that while "combating retrograde mentalities" puts it in the
    negative, and "progressive thinking" in the positive, both
    catchphrases convey the exact same message.

[^11]: The literal translation is "cementation".

[^12]: I.e. "județ", pl. "județe", an administrative division in
    Romania.

[^13]: Referred to henceforth as "the C.C." or "the C.C. of P.C.R.".

[^14]: This is where the actual imperative begins.

[^15]: I'm not sure this is accurate. "Cadru de partid" is somewhat
    related to party cadres, i.e. politruks, but I think Romanian
    communists used it to refer in general to party bureaucrats.

[^16]: This guy was quite literally a nobody at his time in the early
    1900s. So because Romanian communists didn't have a better guy after
    whom to name their "Academy"...

[^17]: Sorry, I couldn't help myself with this "se va face" thing, as
    the whole deed will magically turn itself into being. However, while
    it sounds amusing, unfortunately this logic has been a genocide of
    minds.

[^18]: See, and you thought "inclusiveness" was a brand new thing
    invented by the new activists right around the corner!

[^19]: An "elev" is a student in the pre-university cycle, while a
    "student" is the same, only in higher education.

[^20]: The exact equivalent of today's "tabloids".

[^21]: I don't think "artistic" means what they think it does.

[^22]: The Romanian Communist Party was so progressive that it invented
    "self-help", "personal development" and "staying positive" almost
    half a century before it was cool. Take that, ye feckin' hipsters!

[^23]: So here's the thing that leaves me thinking. It's clear that this
    particular paragraph is a shitty piece of propaganda, in that it's
    not even well thought out; look at it: it shifts the "humanism"
    towards "the society", which, as opposed to what the untrained eye
    might believe, puts the two elements in clear contrast to each
    other.

    Now, the fact that Ceaușescu (or whoever wrote his text) aimed to
    bullshit the Executive Committee is more or less reminiscent of
    nowaday's VC pitches, which would dispel the myth of the tyrannical
    dictator. I mean what the fuck, he could make whatever decisions he
    pleased, humanism be damned. So why the whole pretense? Yes, I get
    it, in front of "the people", but what party executives gave a fuck
    about "hoomanism"?

[^24]: I'm pretty sure the "la cadrele noastre" formulation is
    ungrammatical.

[^25]: Except for those who are more equal, of course.

[^26]: Goddang fucking finally, a clear, unambiguous assignment of
    responsibility!

[^27]: Why "faculties" and not "universities", I don't know. Regardless,
    PCR had a tight political grip on Romanian academic institutions,
    some of them still being managed in that fashion nowadays throughout
    the country.

    One notable example is University Politehnica of Bucharest, which
    coincidentally I graduated. The ex-"rector" turned president of
    University Senate, Ecaterina Andronescu, is also a hardcore member
    of the Social Democratic Party, known for its strong ties with the
    former communist regime.

    The more things change...

[^28]: It's unclear whether the measures will be taken from within the
    Ministry of Education, in which case this should have been phrased
    as "will be taken measures in the Ministry of [...]", or the
    directions are something inherent to said institution, which is a
    nonsensical proposition.

[^29]: Political correct language lesson #123: in this particular
    passage "information" denotes an action, not an item. That is, the
    thesis here expresses that teachers should and will "be informed" on
    "political matters", whatever those might be.

    What the thesis means to say is that the brainwashing must go on in
    an adequate proportion, i.e. "a third of". Let's sit for a moment
    and analyze this linguistic construction, for it makes up a great
    deal of the socialist mind-twisting mechanism. The first observation
    is that in a normal (i.e. non-propagandistic) context, the action of
    conveying information is always attached to the informer, never to
    the informee. The second observation is that normally it is
    completely up to the informee whether it accepts or not a given
    piece of information, whereas the text denotes a completely
    different type of interaction.

    This, my dear reader, is exactly the mechanism of propaganda at
    work, since a time before the invention of the printing press. When
    you read "tech environments need to be more inclusive" or whatever
    other subject is deemed fashionable by a Ministry of Panem et
    Circenses near you, your conscious is fooled into believing you are
    "being informed", while your subconscious is force-fed with whatever
    the clique in power wants you to believe. But enough of this
    technique, Christos Ballas has it amply documented.

[^30]: "U.T.C" stands for "Uniunea Tineretului Comunist", i.e. "The
    Union of Communist Youth".

    I read in the news the other day that one of the "could-have-been"
    presidents of US and A wanted to create a "National Service Reserve"
    for millenials. Un(?)fortunately things didn't work out too well for
    her, but either way, now you know where to go if you want to relive
    the communist dream... while it lasts.

[^31]: Whatwhat?! Either the text's author was some kind of a poet or he
    was fucking kidding the audience. How can an inherently stationary
    concept such as tradition ever revolve? I am dumbfounded by this
    linguistic cum-gargle.

[^32]: "Distracție" is normally translated as entertainment, but in
    reality this is what entertainment is: a (sometimes benign) form of
    distraction.

    Theoretical scenarios involving a toxic surge of entertainment have
    been proposed in works such as Huxley's Brave New World, but can
    also be easily observed in today's very real Western World.

[^33]: I'm getting a bit ahead of myself, but the reality was very
    different. The majority of people living on what is now Romanian
    soil have been Orthodox Christians centuries before such a thing as
    a "Romania" even existed. Even today's rationalist-atheist
    propaganda makes only a small dent in Romanians' belief, which makes
    the Romanian Orthodox Church one of the country's most powerful
    institutions, religious, political or otherwise.

    Geting back to more communist times, as I said, the reality was very
    different. The Orthodox Church still existed, although it had a very
    precarious relationship with the state. Factually, the state
    controlled the church mostly through the secret services, with which
    many priests were forced to collaborate "for their own good". Even
    so, the vast majority of Romanians still went to the church to at
    least take part in the three major events in their spiritual lives:
    getting christened, married and buried.

[^34]: This last bit sound familiar? Let's dissect it.

    "To tear apart creation from our social realities" is the equivalent
    of nowadays' various "social justice" "warriors" brouhaha-ing over
    "misrepresentation" or "underrepresentation" of races, genders et
    al. in "popular media". So the propaganda machines known as
    "Hollywood", "the music industry" et al. deliver, with the average
    result of zero pieces of actual art, meaning e.g. posing actual
    problems instead of pretending to solve pseudo-problems, or
    e.g. having the property to be memorable for at least a decade. Face
    it kids, real music ended in 1972.

    "From the general public of the working people" is an attempt to
    identify the target audience. There's on one hand "the working
    people", and on the other hand nobody else. This is why it's nigh
    impossible to find a good laptop nowadays: because "nobody buys
    laptops anymore"; this is why they don't teach your kids gems such
    as Latin, logic and argumentation in high school nowadays: because
    "they don't use them for nuthin' anyway"*. Yes, this is a way to
    wipe out inconvenient people and artifacts off the face of the
    Earth, and yes, this is systematic, in case you were wondering.

    And this is how we ended up with a mentally retarded
    civilization. Or, how do they call it, "retrograde".

    \-\-\-  
    \* This latter item is discussed in a post of its own on The Tar
       Pit. I won't bother linking it, go dig through the archives.

[^35]: Also known as "followers", "uniques", "clicks", etc.

[^36]: Also known as "reality shows".

[^37]: And that they were. For years actors such as Amza Pellea and Toma
    Caragiu posted on their Youtubes pieces *in good taste* that were
    aimed at communists' harmful or otherwise incompetent
    governance. And so Romanians could live on haz de necaz for a while.

[^38]: The original reads along the lines of "institutions of [public]
    performance, theatre, opera, balet, rostrum", from which we can
    deduce that the author was culturally retarded, because all the
    aforementioned places are "for public performance". As in many other
    sentences above and below this particular line, the author merely
    pretends to be cultured, because look, he distinguished between all
    those places he (or she) never actually bothered to visit.

[^39]: By now the reader will have been driven out of their mind by this
    formulation of the impersonal. This particular piece is also
    somewhat special because it has no grammatical subject.

    Word to the reader: Romanian is a great language; it is also pretty
    difficult, at least as hard as French and Spanish*. Now, the
    construction above happens to be perfectly legitimate, but it also
    happens to be used in our context by retarded people, in a retarded
    manner.

    To Romanian-speaking readers: never** use subjectless constructions
    such as "se va acționa" in a real-life (spoken or written)
    sentence. It really, sadly and unfortunately for you and for anyone
    who's communicating with you (which includes any of your potential
    readers), really means that you're retarded beyond hope.

    \-\-\-  
    \* Only, unlike French and Spanish, it has significant Slavic
      influences, which will make your life noticeably harder if you're
      coming from the West. Not unlike, for example, how French is a
      perfect Latin, if only it weren't for all those Celtic and
      Germanic influences. But we digress from the digression.  
    \*\* Unless, of course, you're willing to break this rule on
      purpose, in which case, well. Constructions such as "din bătrâni
      se povestește [...]" make good exceptions to the rule, and for a
      good reason: they define an implicit logical subject, which in the
      sentence we're analyzing is entirely absent.

[^40]: Of course, they have no fucking idea what the word means:
    vulgarity, that which is vulgar, coming from the Latin vulgus,
    meaning the people. Yes, I know, words don't mean what they mean,
    we're progressives and therefore fuck you.

[^41]: I wonder if the mention of sovereignty has anything to do with
    Ceaușescu's 1968 speech in which he famously slammed the communist
    bloc countries for invading Czechoslovakia. But we're now well over
    the length of your typical Tarpitian text, so we're going to leave
    this story for another time.

[^42]: "Make Romania great again!" and all that.

[^43]: ... and this approval concludes Ceaușescu's text -- assuming it
    was written by him, a fact that I very much doubt. The most frequent
    word in the text is "party" (about 50 occurences, 2% of the total
    word count!), followed by the mostly meaningless "activity" (about
    30 occurences). Other notable words are "political", "educational",
    "ideological", "people" and so on and so forth. I wouldn't exactly
    call the text a reference, but I'm sure it doesn't sound much
    different from any other socialist "manifesto" out there.

    As history shows, the plan was approved. And as history goes,
    Ceaușescu and his clique went forward with trying to implement this
    as per the original spec, not accounting however for the small
    detail that Romanians are not North Koreans, and, as told by the
    great Costache Negruzzi in his romanticization of Alexandru
    Lăpușneanu, they're "proști, dar mulți", i.e., the people may have
    been stupid, but there was a whole bunch of them out there ready to
    separate the king's head from the rest of him.

    From what I've been told, the first few years after the 6th of July
    weren't so bad. Things had gotten progressively worse however as
    Ceaușescu started his attempt to repay Romania's entire sovereign
    debt, an endeavour which he brought to GREAT SUCCESS! By '88 (the
    year when I decided I should fall out of a vagina) "the people" were
    both starved and fed up at the same time, of the
    "multilaterally-developed" claptrap among others, which was also
    quite the achievement.

    The whole thing unsurprisingly, as in Lăpușneanu's case and many
    others before and after it, ended in blood. Ironically, it would
    seem that political leaders, of course! the elites well-versed in
    matters cultural, ideological, political, historical and of
    circle-jerking and cum gargling, don't seem to have figured this
    simple turn of events out. And so, the time draws ever nearer when
    the next set of heads will begin to fall.
