---
postid: 043
title: On the failure of marketing (and civilization in general)
date: February 14, 2016
author: Lucian Mogoșanu
tags: asphalt
---

"Marketing" is, or should be, in fact a bit of an umbrella term for at
least two or three things.

Firstly, marketing is, or should be, the science that studies the needs
of the market, or more exactly the needs of the people that make up the
market. This is the so-called "market research": what products do people
*need* and what *can* they (afford to) buy?

Secondly, marketing is, or should be, a set of techniques for making a market,
or rather the people that make up a market, aware of the existence of some
product, no more, no less. This is roughly the same as what people nowadays
call "public relations".

It happens, as the history goes, that in the past few decades[^1] a slow
but sure rupture between the term and its meaning occured, among others,
in marketing, and this phenomenon will, I am assuming, continue along
its path towards a slow and painful death. The meaning of marketing has
already inflated, or rather, it has become more and more diluted, as
definitions such as the couple above have shifted more from is to
should-be.

To illustrate this, we will take a very simple example, that of the
mobile phone[^2]. A first observation would be that nowadays' mobile
phones are no longer phones in the classic sense of the word, such that
their stupid creators[^3] had to pollute the space of ideas with the new
concept of smartphone. And this has been going on and on with the
tablet, phablet and who knows what's next.

Notice how these new products are not really innovative. Smartphones are
in fact mobile phones with an integrated camera of lower quality than
previous dedicated cameras[^4] and an integrated computer of much less
power[^5] than the average desktop computer, among the other integrated
products, usually of lower quality than their predecessors. Tablets are
bigger smartphones that can pack a bit more hardware, while phablets
are, I don't know, FSM[^6] knows what.  The next thing they'll do is try
to put the same thing on the head unit of your car and in your fridge,
in a desperate attempt to mix stuff together in the other new
meta-buzzword called "the Internet of Things".

What's more outrageous is that the mobile phone has an artificially
induced lifespan of about one to two years[^7]. That is because most
modern organizations impose themselves this magical thing called
time-to-market, which means that a given product must imperatively be
released until some given date. It doesn't matter that it's unusable,
that it has bugs or that
[software engineering is a myth][software-engineering], they'll want it
out by then and the armies of employees will have to work their asses
off for that. That is, until the next iteration, when they'll ship with
some other useless "features" and a set of new, shiny handicaps that'll
make your life a nightmare. And I thought it was now long established
that the only product worth buying once a year was the calendar, as per
the ol' communist centralized planned economy model.

<p style="text-align:center; font-weight:bold;">⁂</p>

Although it doesn't look like it on a first glance, marketing is failing
because it doesn't inform people of the existence of things that they
need to buy. What it does instead is to aggressively lure them into
wanting, that is, into believing that they need to buy a certain
product, regardless of whether they actually do; or, more importantly,
not.

How product owners do that is a whole different story. Branding is in
fact not so harmful as one might believe. The introduction of jargon up
to saturation is however a great source of confusion for clients, who
don't feel safe delving into technical details, and thus they're given
some weird term to cater to their naïveté. Returning to the smartphone
example, tell me what Corning Gorilla Glass *actually* means and you win
a prize. No, you don't know, you just trust[^8] what you're told, and
the producers could give you a piece of post-processed horse manure as
far as they're concerned, you'll still buy it.

This, combined with 24/7 mass propaganda are *the* things that make the
market go round, "tech start-ups" gain billions of fake dollars[^9] and
pop stars chill with their homies in their cribs.

Now, why they do that is yet another different story. They do it because
it's easy, first and foremost. It didn't use to be easy back in the day,
but it's gotten progressively so as the generations got dumber[^10] and
the dumb taught their children to be even dumber, so that they just
returned to shopping shortly after the airplanes took down at least a
part of the non-dumbness that was left in this otherwise dumb
"civilized" world.

<p style="text-align:center; font-weight:bold;">⁂</p>

Of course, "it's not marketing's fault"[^11] that marketing is failing,
or has failed.  The fault -- not a moral fault, but a deep, technical
fault, in the sense of "failure" -- lies in a culture who found it
easier to manipulate adults than to educate their children properly,
where memes, tropes and quotes taken out of context hold more value than
a book and where one must "do what they enjoy"[^12].

The net effect of this marketing that is not a marketing is
[post-religion][post-religion], transitioning into full-blown
[fundamentalism][religiousness].

Still think I'm full of shit? Here's what: take a popular video on
YouTube, preferably one that you also like; look in the comments
section, but promise you're going to read it in its entirety. If you
don't see anything wrong with what's going on there, then there's the
door, have fun with your Bieber and your tablet and stop wasting your
time and my bandwidth.

[^1]: About roughly the same time as my age. Is this a coincidence? I
have no idea.

[^2]: Although any product would do. Really. Go ahead, choose
one. You'll be surprised by how most things have been twisted into
useless junk by today's "marketing".

[^3]: Yes, I am looking at you, rotten Steve Jobs.

[^4]: Although the gap between the two has narrowed and it continues to
    do so.

[^5]: Not in terms of *raw* computing power, but in terms of what -- and
this is a very broad "what" -- its master can do with it. You don't even
own your smartphone, so you can only use it for whatever "apps" your
master has designed for you. Oh, and the gap between *these* two will
only continue to widen. Just look at your
[average mobile operating system][android].

[^6]: Flying Spaghetti Monster.

[^7]: Nobody cares of the poor hardware. Most sane people can and will
still make use of that old Nokia 3310, *and* break someone's head with
it in self-defense. There, integration!

[^8]: The takeaway message here is that trust does indeed mean
something, only not on the mass market. No, not when you're one of the
billion clueless consumers. So whatever you'd say, they tricked you into
buying their latest and greatest.

[^9]: Don't tell me you thought WhatsApp are *really* worth that
much. Well, you'll be surprised, sooner rather than later.

[^10]: Or maybe "the generations got dumber" is just bias? It might be,
but this is a story for another time.

[^11]: On the same note as "information wants to be free".

[^12]: I'm probably a hedonist at least as much as anybody else, but the
question is: if you look around you, can you easily spot the things that
you don't enjoy? And moreover, what are you going do to purge them out
of your life?  Starting, say, yesterday.

[android]: /posts/y02/03f-android-the-bad-and-the-ugly.html
[software-engineering]: /posts/y02/03c-the-myth-of-software-engineering.html
[post-religion]: /posts/y00/018-on-post-religion.html
[religiousness]: /posts/y01/034-the-transition-back-into-religiousness.html
